[chief speaks Osage]
[speaks Osage]
[tribe members wailing]
[tribe member
speaks Osage, sobs]
[tribe members wailing in Osage]
[wailing continues in distance]
[no audible dialogue]
[people clamoring]
[recruiter, in English]
Phillips Oil workmen,
right here.
[recruiter 2] Kraceon Oil
pipeline crew, over here.
[recruiter 3]
Burbank Oil Field, over here.
[recruiter 4] Marland Oil!
[recruiter] Rock hounds
for Phillips Oil, this truck.
Make it rich.
You can make it rich.
Make it rich. Right here.
[chattering indistinctly]
[recruiters clamoring,
shouting indistinctly]
Phillips Oil workmen!
[people shouting, clamoring]
[brawlers shouting, grunting]
Ernest!
Yeah.
Ernest Burkhart?
- Henry.
- Yeah.
Henry Roan.
I'm taking you
- to your uncle Hale.
- All right.
Come on. Let's go.
This is us, right here.
[brawler] Come on, stop!
[brawlers shouting, grunting]
Whose land is this, Henry?
My land.
Well, well, well.
Our war hero has arrived.
Welcome home, Ernest.
Welcome home.
It's so good to see you again.
I'm so glad you made it.
[Ernest] Brother. [chuckles]
- Thanks for writin', huh?
- Good to have you back, Brother.
Ernest, now,
here's your aunt Myrtle
and your cousin, little Willie.
Welcome.[Willie] It's so good
to see you.
[Hale] Look how big she's grown.
Isn't that something?
[speaks Osage]
[chuckles, speaks Osage]
[in English]
Now, this is a cattle ranch.
There's no oil here.
No oil? Yeah. No oil, no fear,
so I'm settled with no fear.
Time will run out.
This wealth will run dry,
drier than the seven years
of famine that plagued
the pharaohs of old.
They're a sick people.
They're kindly people,
big-hearted people,
but they're sickly.
What about you?
You see bloodshed?
- [clicks tongue] Some.
- Mm-hmm.
Well, I was a--
I was a cook in--
in the infantry.
Mm-hmm.
You see Kelsie Morrison?
He was over there.
- I did.
- Yeah.
Otis Griggs and the others,
if... [stammers]
...if you remember.
Soldiers have to eat.
You fed the soldiers
that won the war.
- Well, saw more die
from the flu, but...
- Mmm.
So what happened
to your stomach?
My-- My gut, it burst.
Mmm, mmm.
You almost lost your life.
They gave me a belt and told me
not to do any heavy lifting.
Well, you made a good choice
coming back here, 'cause here--
I know.
Money flows freely here, now.
Well, I do--
I do love that money, sir.
[both chuckle]
Don't call me "sir."
You call me "Uncle,"
or call me "King,"
like you used to.
Remember?
- Call you "King"?
- Yeah.
King.
Now, you didn't pick up
any disease over there, did you?
- No. No.
- Sure?
I'm sure, sir. I'm sure.
Not that I know of.
[chuckles][chuckles]
You keep that thing
wrapped up over there?
- I did. I did.
- Mmm.
- As best you could.
- As best I could.
[both chuckle]
[Hale] Yeah.
You like women?
Ah, you know I like women.
[chuckles] That's my weakness.
What kinds they got out there?
Just white.
- Just white, that I saw.
- Hmm.
Mm-hmm.
You like red?
Red?
You mean
- that kind of red?
- Mm-hmm.
I like red. I like white.
I like blue.
I like all of 'em. [chuckles]
- Don't matter to me.
I'm greedy. [laughs]
- Mmm. [laughs]
I-- I like the heavy ones.
I like the heavy ones,
pretty ones, soft,
ones that smell good, you know.
Well, we gotta
keep an eye on you.
You're all over the place.
Uh, speaking of that...
Hey, Byron.
Yeah.
Oh.
Oh, yeah, that's good.
That's-- That's real good.
Don't get played out in the open
with alcohol, you hear?
'Cause then
you'll cause trouble.
- Right, Byron?
- That's right, King.
- [Hale] Mmm.
- No, sir. I w--
I won't. I won't.
Now, most fellas out here
are crooked.
Some do things right,
most do bad,
so don't be simple.
- No, sir. I won't.
- Don't make small trouble
about nothing.
You gonna make trouble,
make it big.
Get a big payoff for that,
you hear?
Yes, sir.
You see, I am officially
reserve deputy sheriff
in Fairfax.
I don't want to bring
unwanted eyes.
- I won't find that trouble.
- Yeah.
I won't do stupid things.
And you got
your head on straight
after being over there?
Course I do. I'm not--
I'm not thick, sir.
I'm-- I'm-- I'm strong.
Well, I got a place
I'm gonna put you.
- That'll be driving.
- Mmm.
'Cause you can't do much else
'cause of your gut.
You don't read much, do you?
Read?
Do you read, yeah. Read much?
Well, I can read.
Eh. Well,
you smarten yourself up.
Get him that book
on the Osage, Byron.
- This one?
- Yeah, that one.
- You smarten yourself up.
- I-- I can read, sir.
[Hale chuckles] The Osage.
They have
the worst land possible...
[chuckles] ...but the good Lord,
he outsmarted everybody.
The land had oil on it.
Black gold.
But they're wise people.
They worked it so as they had
the say who gets the oil,
who gets the headrights.
The Osage are sharp.
They don't talk much,
so that might make you feel
like you've got
to run your mouth
to fill the space,
especially you been drinking.
Better you be quiet
if you don't got
nothing smart to say.
Don't get caught on that.
It's what they call,
"blackbird talk."
- [imitates bird]
- [chuckles]
- [Hale imitates bird]
- [all laugh]
Blackbird talk.
- [imitates bird]
- [all laughing]
Just 'cause they're not talking,
don't mean they don't know
everything about everything.
Yeah, Osage are the finest
and most beautiful people
on God's earth.
[grunting]
[wheezing]
[wheezing stops]
[narrator]
John Whitehair, age 23.
No investigation.
Bill Stepson, age 29.
Anna Sanford, age 41.
No investigation.
Rose Lewis...
age 25.
No investigation.
There we go.
[narrator]
And Sara Butler, age 21.
Suicide.
[employee] State your name.
I'm Mollie Kyle. Incompetent.
What is your allotment number?
Two hundred eighty-five.
You've asked for
additional moneys of $752
to pay a medical bill
for an abscess.
Yes, sir.
Was the operation successful?
And the diabetes?
I have a prescription
at Fairfax Drugs. I'll send
my help to fill twice monthly.
You gotta look out for that,
you know.
Now, Mollie, it's your mother.
You know she's restricted too,
so we have to account
for every penny.
It says here she spent
$319 and 05 cents for meat
at the grocery.
Don't you think
that's an awful lot of meat
for what she needs?
Yes, Mr. Beaty.
Well, you'll look after that,
won't you?
Yes.
All right, people.
Let's form a line here
for allotment payments.
Unrestricted only.
Restricted, take your guardian.
He has to be with you
to sign your checks.
You need to find your guardian.
Nothing new this time, folks.
Thirty-dollar photo
for posterity.
Don't you wanna preserve
your family history? Come on.
How about you, sir? You--Now,
don't go after him.
He don't know nothing.
He's an amateur.
You need a proper photo
for you and your family.
For you, sir? $40.
How much? $40?$40.
All right.
I got $35 cash for you
right now.
- Take it or leave it.
- Thirty-five's a deal.
Let's have it, get it done.
Y'all are gonna make
a pretty picture.
Y'all, come on this way,
over here.
My wife's been feeling poorly.
The doctor says
it's her constitution.
The boy's got asthma.
His asthma's holding him back.
He just needs a chance.
You've got your checks.
You're unrestricted. Please.
[speaks Osage]
[in English]
We'll take one. In that color.
- [speaks Osage]
- [in English] Thank you.
Thank you!
I'll tell you what,
you run out of gas,
you get a flat tire,
you come right on back
and buy another.
[speaks Osage]
[in English]
Ma'am, you need a ride?
That's my bucket, right there.
Thank you.[horn honks]
Gotta be careful.
A lot of characters
around here today.
[whistles]
[Kelsie] Hey, Ernest!
Hey, Kelsie Morrison! [laughs]
We were at the front
- together in France.
- Hey!
How you doing?
- Great to see you!
- You too. You too.
My wife, Catherine Cole.
Oh, pleased to meet you.
Pleased to meet you.
Full blood.
Sky People, right? Sky People?
- Middle Water. Middle Water.
- [Ernest] Oh.
- [car engine roars]
- Lot of money on this.
[whistles]
[horse whinnies]
Whoo!
You got money on this race?
No. No.
Let's go, then.
Yep.
[bystanders whooping, clamoring]
[priest] I'm sorry to hear
she's not doing good.
You know, Father,
just as stubborn as ever.
Tell your mom I'm praying
for her, okay?
- Take care. Yeah.
- Thank you, Father.
[Hale] You know who I mean
when I say Mollie Kyle?
You know the one,
with the sisters.
I know which one.
- Mollie.
- Yeah. Mollie.
She lives with her mother, Lizzie.
I know, Uncle, which one.
I know her.
I've bee--
I've been driving her.
- Driving her?
- Yeah.
Matt Williams used
to go with her for a time.
They're not together
in a way now,
so that means
you could have
a proposition with that
if that struck you.
Oh. [chuckles]
You want-- You want me
to see after her.
[chuckles]
- She's a regular
customer of mine.
- Yeah.
I think she--
she's sweet on me too.
[all laugh]
That Mollie,
- she's easy to like. Yeah.
- Yeah.
Full blood estate, at that, too.
- Full-- Full blood estate.
Now, that's something
a man can work with, hmm?
You got a good face,
you know that?
[chuckles]
Think you can be
the marrying kind?
- Marrying kind?
- Mm-hmm.
Uh, how do you mean?
Well, we mix
these families together,
and that estate money flows
the right direction,
it'll come to us.
That's a full blood estate.
And she gets that money
of the mother Lizzie.
Now, that's good business there.
And legal, not against the law.
That's smart investment.
They told me you was--
you was going with Matt Williams
for a time.
You talk too much.
Nah. Nah, I don't talk too much.
Just thinking who I gotta beat
in this horse race, that's all.
I didn't realize
this was a race.
I don't care
for watching horses.
Well, I'm a different
kind of horse.
[clicks tongue]
[chuckles][speaks Osage]
[speaks Osage][in English] What?
What was that?
[speaks Osage]
[in English] That's how you are.
I don't know what you said,
but it must've been Indian
for "handsome devil."
[laughing, speaks Osage][chuckles]
[pulls hand brake]
[in English] All right.
[Ernest] "I am an Osage brave.
A long time ago,
we Osage took our name
from Missouri and Osage Rivers."
"Ni-U-Kon-Ska,
Children of the Middle Waters.
'Move,' said
the Great White Father,
from Missouri, from Arkansas,
from Kansas.
Finally, another strange land,
Oklahoma,
where famine walked by day
and hungry wolves by night.
Can you find the wolves
in this picture?"
[door opens]
All right, let's go. Come on.
[Ernest]
"Osage weren't ever part
of the Five Civilized Tribes."
- You remember Blackie Thompson?
- Howdy, boys!
[Ernest]
"Of the Five Civilized Tribes,
the Cherokee, Chickasaw,
Choctaw, Creek and Seminole."
[Ernest] Don't move!
[Blackie] Ooh, that rock
still shines in the dark, boys.
Give me that.
Just take the car.
Don't take my ring.
My father gave it to me.
[Blackie]
Don't want the car.
Just want the jewels.
Y'all didn't do nothing
to earn this anyway.
[Byron] You like these?
[Blackie] Got us
some rich Indians, boys!
[Ernest] Come on!
Come on! Come on!
[poker player]
I'm going all in, boys.
What are you thinking, Ernest?
[Blackie]
No. That's crazy, Ernest!
I love money. I love money!
Turn that card over! Boom!
- Come on!
- Yeah! Do it! Hell yeah!
Take a chance!
- [Byron groans]
- [Blackie groans]
Fairfax horseshit
right there, boy.[Byron] Goddamn!
- [poker player]
Queen gets the jewels.
- [Ernest] God! Shit!
[Ernest] "Dawn was always
a sacred time for prayers."
[speaks Osage]
[Ernest, in English]
"They call the sun
'Grandfather.'
The moon, 'Mother.'
Fire, 'Father.'
They call it the 'Flower Moon'
when tiny flowers spread
over the blackjack hills
and the prairies.
There are many.
So many, it's as if Wah-kon-tah
looked down upon the earth,
smiled,
and sprinkled it
with sugar candy."
[speaks Osage]
[Ernest, in English]
"Wah-kon-tah means 'God.'
You're given your Osage name."
[in Osage]
[Ernest, in English]
"It's how you will be called
to the next world.
Your Osage name can never
be taken away from you."
[speaks Osage]
[attendees ululating]
[in English] Here. Put this on.
Hmm.
You want dinner?
Yeah.
[Mollie speaks Osage]
[speaks Osage]
[in English]
Don't you want a bite of this?
I got too much sugar. [chuckles]
Can never be too sweet, now,
can you?
It makes me sickly.
You live in this house
just-- just with your mother?
I take care for her. [chuckles]
And you live with your uncle?
- Yes. Yes. You know him?
- Mmm.
- Since I can remember.
- Hmm.
He's a nice man.
Why did you come here?
For what?
To live here.
Yes. Um, I-- I live here.
- Why?
- Oh.
Uh, for my uncle.
- I work with him.
- Mmm.
And your brother is Bryan?
- Byron, that's right.
- Byron.
[Ernest sighs]
You scared of him?
My brother? Who?
Your uncle.
Well, no.
No, he's-- he's the king
of the Osage Hills. [chuckles]
He's the nicest man
in the world.
I know if you cross him
- what he could do.
- Mmm.
No, I'm-- [clears throat]
I'm my own man.
I do my own work.
I'm a businessman.
Yeah, thanks.
Here you go.
What's your religion?
- Catholic.
- Mmm.
You don't come to church.
- Oh, yes, um, I've been away.
- Hmm.
How come you don't have
a husband?
I'm a man, and I want to know
why a woman like you
doesn't have a husband.
You know, you got--
You got nice color skin.
What-- What color
would you say that is?
My color.
Well, I think it's--
I think it's real pretty.
[chuckles]
You got nice color skin.
You-You got--
You got a nice house.
I think you just pretend
to be so severe.
Bet you--
I bet you got a soft belly
on the inside there.
[speaks Osage]
[in English]
Oh, you just called me
a coyote, didn't you?
[speaks Osage]
[in English] Coyote.
Coyote wants money. [chuckles]
Well, that money's
- real nice.
- Mmm.
It's real nice, especially
if you're lazy like me.
I mean, I wanna sleep all day,
and I wanna make a party
when it's dark.
[laughs]
What's so funny, hmm?
You like peh-tseh nee?
- Whiskey.
- Mmm.
I don't like whiskey,
I love whiskey.
I have good whiskey,
not bad whiskey.
I think we should try some
and find out.
[speaks Osage, chuckles]
[speaks Osage, laughs][chuckles]
[thunder rumbling]
[Mollie speaks Osage]
[in English]
No, no. No. No, don't close it.
- What?
- Uh, we--
We need to be quiet for a while.
[Ernest sighs]
The storm, it's, uh...
Well, it's powerful. [chuckles]
So we need to be quiet
for a while.
It's good for the crops,
- that's for sure.
- Just be still.
[priest praying in Latin]
[whispers] Bill Smith.
- Ernest. Ernest Burkhart.
- Good to meet you, Ernest.
I'm Minnie's husband.
[altar bell chimes]
[praying continues]
[players whooping, clamoring]
[players cheer]
[indistinct]
- [players clamoring]
- [spectators chattering]
It might make you feel
a little better
if you eat something.
No, not again. Aw!
[Mollie, in Osage]
[relative]
[grunts]
[speaks Osage, laughs]
[all laughing]
[Mollie] Oh! [laughs]
[relative]
[Ernest moans][Mollie grunts, chuckles]
[speaks Osage, chuckles][chuckles]
[in English] Slow down.
[chuckles] Your hand looks
on my skin...
You're gonna marry me, Mollie.
I want you to be my wife.
Will you do that?
Can you stand her kind?
I love this girl. Mollie.
Uncle, I... [stammers]
I really do think she's a lady.
Well, then you found a wife.
[people clamoring, cheering]
[elder speaks Osage]
Mollie.
Ernest.
[speaking Osage]
[guests whooping, applauding]
[in English] I've known
Mollie and her sisters
since they were
little girls running around,
making a lot of trouble.
[guests laugh]
[speaks Osage][speaks Osage]
[in English] Mollie's
dear departed father,
Nah-kah-e-se-y,
was a dear, dear friend of mine,
a beloved friend of the heart.
He always used
to tell the white men
just to call him Jimmy,
but I always called him
by his proper name,
Nah-kah-e-se-y.
We had great respect
for each other.
[Ernest whistles][guests cheering, applauding]
[guests cheering, whooping]
[folk music playing]
[guest whoops]
[Kelsie] You and me.
[chuckles][chuckles]
[Kelsie] Whoo!
[Ernest] Keep going right.
I'm going right.
[both laughing]
[Hale] Minnie.
What do you need for, Minnie?
No, sir.
You well taken care of?
Yes.
You have proper medicines?
'Cause I want you to know
you have the best care
if you need.
I don't want you to be afraid.
[sobs]
So many troubles
that we've brought upon you,
all of you.
I'm so sorry.
[speaking Osage]
[Hale continues in Osage]
[Mollie, in English]
Minnie. My sister.
Wasting illness.
[speaks Osage]
[sobs]
[people crying]
[crying]
[in English] Anna.
[Bill] Ernest.
Yeah?
Ernest, it might be best
for you to sit outside.
What-- Well, why's that?
It's just the way this is going.
If you don't mind.
"The way this is going"?
You-- You're saying
you want me outside?
Yes, sir, if you would.
All right.
- Bill Smith.
- Mmm.
Yeah.
It shows itself to you
that Bill Smith didn't
take the proper care of Minnie
the way he could have.
To have her sick and die,
take her headrights
and her land?
That oil, which should go
to her sisters, your wife,
well, he's taking money
that, by rights,
should go to Mollie.
The mother, Lizzie.
She's not in good shape.
She won't last.
Most Osage don't live past 50.
With these women dying,
with how Osage suffer
from illness,
you have to make it
the headrights come to you.
You see?
Yeah.
[Hale] Minnie's gone now,
and after her, that leaves...
Reta... Mmm.
...Anna,
and then, of course,
there's Mollie.
Yeah.
How's Mollie feeling?
She's-- She's all right.
Takes care of the little one.
- She's got the, uh--
the diabetes too.
- Yeah.
I worry for her sometimes.
She's-- She's sick most days, King.
Of course she is.
How could she not be? This
diabetes is a trial to bear.
Like it says in the book of Job,
the days of affliction
have taken hold upon her.
Well, Mollie,
she's still strong, King.
She's strong.
Yeah, for now.
We hope, forever, but...
[Hale sighs]
What about Anna?
You know Anna carries a gun
in her purse?
- [clamoring]
- Hey, what the hell?
[Anna mutters]
I know you get around--
[partygoers scream, shout]
Shit!
[partygoer 1] What the hell?[partygoer 2]
Fucking crazy squaw!
Now, I love Anna,
but she's gonna
pick a fight one day
with the wrong person.
And then what?
[speaking Osage]
["St. Louis Blues" playing]
[chattering]
[chattering continues]
[hoots]
- [music, chatter stops]
- [hoots]
[hoots]
[music, chatter resumes]
[Ernest's sibling] Hey. Stop it.[Martha] Put it all
on the table.
[chattering]
- [Aunt Annie] Stop it. Manners.
- [Jim] Nobody's got
any manners here.
[in Osage]
[sighs]
[chattering]
[in English]
Let's get all of them.
This one's whiter than that one.
You'd never know
this one's a half-breed,
would you?
They're both a couple of
little half-assed savages,
as far as I'm concerned.
Bless their little hearts, now,
they can't help it.
One dark and one light.
And it's like an eclipse.
The Lord put his hand
over the earth
and made it shake for nothing.
Oh, goodness. [giggles]
- Take care, Anna.
- Oh, thank you, sir.
[sighs]
[in Osage]
[speaks Osage]
[Mollie]
["Crazy Blues" playing]
[in English] Hello, Anna.
You steady?
Oh, I am pickled. [giggles]
You got any whiskey?
Well, you drank it last night.
Only my man can drink
my whiskey.
[chuckles] I'm not your man.
Well, maybe you don't have
a choice.
[in Osage]
[Mollie, in English] Hey, hey.
Keep yourself settled down
in here, Anna.
You'll do right.
You're making threats, Anna.
Don't do that.
I'm telling you a secret.
You think I open my legs
for any man?
Well, I get that feeling.
Hey! Hey!
Come on, now.[Mollie speaks Osage]
Get her in the other room now.
You are no different,
Ernest. Hear me?[Mollie speaks Osage]
- You are no different.
- Get in the other room!
[Mollie speaks Osage]
[in Osage]
[in English]
Yeah, I'm all right.
- [chair thuds]
- [items clatter]
You are so pretty.
You know me?
Yes.
What do you know?
Fuck yourself, Byron Burkhart.
[Ernest] Anna! Anna!
Hey! Come on, now![Mollie] Anna!
I will cut you,
talking to my man! I'll kill
that woman, then I'll kill you!
- [Ernest] Stand down.
- I'm not your man.
I'll do as I please.
[speaking Osage][Ernest] Get her out of here!
Give me that.[sibling] She's got a gun!
Give me that. Come on!
Stay away
from these white women!
Stay away from those
wahk' oh nohn-hohn!
Move!
Get out!
Savage!
[shouting, indistinct]
Come on, Charlie. Right up here.
This one French soldier,
he came up, he tried to grab
that saucer pan.
I saw his leg blown clean off.
A lot of them came back
like this. Shaking.
Hey.
Mmm.
Did you hear they found
Charlie Whitehorn dead?
Aye. Aye. Who did that?
I don't know.
Was it his wife?
Mm-hmm. Most likely.
Now, Anna...
It's time for me
to take her home now.
[in Osage]
[knocks]
[in English] Anna.
Anna, mahn-theen eh-txahn.
Byron's waiting. Come on.
- Mmm.
- Come on, now.
Mmm.
[in Osage]
[Anna chuckles]
- [in English]
Anna, come on, now.
- Stop banging.
[sighs]
Time for me to go,
Ernest?
Yeah.
You don't want me here, do you?
You trying to get rid of me,
aren't you, snake? Aw. [hisses]
[scoffs, chuckles]
You're afraid I'll say too much.
Yeah, I see you're afraid.
You look better.
Why, thank you, Sister.
[giggles]
You're my wealth, you know that?
[speaks Osage]
[in English] You worry
too much, oh-theh-zhoo.
Come on. Let's go.
Okay.
Goodness, let's go find
another drink.
No, I'm taking you home, Anna.
No, you're taking me
to Whizbang.
[Byron chuckles]
Byron's taking her home now.
I'm too drunk.
You don't say.
He's taking her home.
[engine starts]
[sheriff] Mollie,
it's your sister, Anna.
Come on, now.
Come on, now, sweetheart.[whimpering]
- [Ernest] Come on.
- [Mollie crying, panting]
Is this your sister, Anna Brown?
Pardon me. [stammers]
Yes.
[Chief Bonnicastle]
Two members of our tribe,
Anna Brown
and Charles Whitehorn...
- [tribe murmurs]
- ...were both murdered.
These ahn-shdah-heh
are murdering us.
[tribe murmurs in agreement]
[Chief Bonnicastle]
In the case of Anna Brown,
her family here on the west side
have raised funds
of the amount of about
$2,000 to $5,000
for the arrest and conviction
of the murderer.
[tribe murmurs in agreement]
Mollie Burkhart has hired
a private investigator.
[speaks Osage]
[in English]
When this money started coming,
we should've known
it came with something else.
- 'Cause it's
the white man's money.
- [tribe murmuring]
It's not what we were taught,
coming out of Missouri,
Arkansas and Kansas.
What has come to our reservation
that doesn't belong here?
And it's them.
They're like buzzards
circling our people.
- [tribe member] Yeah.
- Yeah.
They wanna pick us body clean,
leave nothing.
When we left Missouri,
we didn't even leave
our dead babies.
We laid 'em down and we rode
our warriors over 'em
to tell everyone that we'll
never leave this place again.
Or we'll die here,
to the last one.
- Yeah. Yeah.
- [tribe murmurs in agreement]
Switch.
[Mollie crying, groaning]
Hey, Mollie. Mollie,
words can't express my grief,
but she's with the Lord now.
She's with the Lord.[sniffles]
- [sawing]
- [cries]
[Chief Paul Red Eagle]
And they even come here now
to marry our young women.
[tribe murmurs]
I employ some of them.
They say they are my friends,
but I don't think
they really are.
[Chief Bonnicastle] Some of them
don't even pretend to work.
They walk around,
they act like
they own the place.
- Okay, gentlemen.
Hold still, please.
- We got it!
I mean, these people are bums,
nee-shdah-heh, common vags.
We can't turn to the county
to help us.
We can't go
to the state of Oklahoma
to help us.
Why have we ever even thought
they would?
We were here before them.
This is our homeland we came to.
Yeah. Yeah.
Why we put our children here
is because Mother Earth
allowed us here.
- Yeah.
- [tribe murmurs]
No one takes us off this earth
until God calls us all home.
Yeah.
And we've got to realize that,
but we've also got to realize
this evil that's come here.
You have something it wants.
- Yeah.
- It didn't want you when we was
coming through genocides,
our coming home.
But now we put
the original 25 families
together in this room.
- [tribe murmurs]
- Yeah.
And we're here to go with you.
The old saying says is that--
that Osage is dying
by the enemy.
Do not let them die alone.
You go join them.
So we can go to heaven
knowing we're still warriors.
We have to change,
but before we do, we need to be
like a fire on this earth
and get rid of all that stops
or gets in front of us.
My council, I ask you
for your support.
All of you men.
And our women, these mothers,
these ee-nahn here.
All of our elders
have come through
this landscape,
and we-- only thing we know
is that we have each other.
We have a Lord
that's been good to us.
And this-- this other--
We never prayed
for the great life.
We just prayed for life.
And that's what
I'm gonna be praying for now,
is that we get that life
for these kids coming.
And, see, our days are over.
We're just barely
living out a sundown,
but their days are starting.
And I want 'em to be Osages,
just like the gift
that Grandma gave me,
that Grandma gave you.
[tribe murmurs in agreement]
Thank you, Chief.
I would like to add
a thousand dollars
to that reward money...
[tribe murmurs]
...for any information
about these murders.
That means if anyone
knows anything about it,
you must come to me.
You all know where I am.
I'm easy to find.
[Chief Bonnicastle]
Thank you, Mr. Hale.
Your friendship has always been
greatly appreciated.
I'll do anything, anything,
to help the Osage
in their plight,
in their vale of tears.
I move that we send
Mr. Barney McBride
to Washington, D.C.
I will second that.
Mr. McBride, Mrs. McBride.
Yes, Chief. I'm here.
Resolution 23.
Mr. McBride will travel
to Washington, D.C.
to meet with
the Indian Affairs Commission,
where he will ask
for private investigators
and additional police
so that they can look into
this matter of all this death.
Do you accept this?
Yes, I do.
[tribe murmurs in approval]
Bill. Reta.
How are you, Ernest?
So you're, uh--
you're here now, huh?
Reta was a comfort to me
when Minnie died.
[softly] Hey, listen.
Leave the jewels be
on this one, all right?
Oh, I-- I do it
so nobody notices.
No, no. Come on, Frank.
Just-- just leave it be,
just this one time, for me.
It's my wife's sister,
all right?[sighs] There.
$25 for a hearse rental?
Uh-- $1,650 for-for
a mahogany casket?
You charging me Osage prices.
You think I'm thick, huh?
No, everybody pays the same.
Come on, now.
McAllister's entire funeral
wasn't more than 300.
This here--
This here's 2,000, Frank.
McAllister's daughter
was just a youngster.
I'll tell you what.
I'ma talk to King Hale
about this.
See what he has to say.
Well, if you want her
in a wooden box,
I'll put her in one.
I-- I don't want no wooden box,
all right? You are charging me
Osage prices.
Your wife even said
she wanted an open casket.
[whispers] But there's no face.
There's no face, Frank.
Why would she want it open, huh?
You trying to steal our money?
Is that what you're trying--
It ain't--
It ain't your money.
It's easy for you
to get me more money
and pay my bill.
I work for my money.
Just like the good Lord says,
you sow and reap, Ernest.
When was the last time
you've seen one of them
Osages working, huh?
[executor]
Well, your sister, Anna,
leaves an estate
of approximately $100,000
to be willed
to your mother, Lizzie Q.,
and you, Mollie, and you, Reta.
You know, I was thinking,
that is a substantial
amount of money.
I heard that Tall Chief hired
the Emmett Miller minstrel show
to come in and play
for his birthday party,
and I thought, "Why-- Why
couldn't we do something
like that with this money?"
Maybe have a party
for the town, and maybe
invite another band out.
[Mollie] It does not do
to talk to this man.
Evil surrounds my heart.
Many times, I cry,
and this evil around my heart
comes out of my eyes.
I close my heart
and keep what is good there,
but hate comes.
And they say
I ought to kill these white men
who killed my family.
Mrs. Burkhart. Bill Burns.
I solve crimes.
This is my card.
My address is New York,
London, Paris,
Montreal, Chicago, Los Angeles,
Cairo, Berlin, Boston
and wherever else
a law-abiding citizen...
[lodge concierge]
Mr. Barney McBride?[Barney] Yes.
Telegram for you, sir.
Just arrived.
[grunts]
- [screaming, grunting]
- [assailants grunting]
[Burns]
...hasn't been to Anna's place
to corroborate Byron's story.
Now, I stopped by there,
and I did find
her alligator purse,
which could suggest
that Byron is not lying.
He brought her home.
Well, my--
my brother's not a liar.
Uh, your youngest sister,
Minnie, who died of the wasting
illness two years ago,
she was married
to a "Bill Smith."
Yes.
And that is the same
Bill Smith currently married
to your sister, Reta.
Yes.
[sighs] Same Bill Smith.
Two sisters.
Mr. Smith, he is a busy fellow,
talking around town,
conducting his own investigation
into Anna's death.
Much obliged, Sheriff.
- Thank you, sir.
- Thank y'all again.
Appreciate it.
[Burns] Were you aware of that?
You were?
Yes.
Now, you went straight
to Mollie's house?
[driver] We didn't
go straight there.
Where'd you go?
Graveyard out past Florer's.
She wanted to look at her land,
then she wanted to visit
her father.
[Anna] Mm-mmm,
I cannot see my daddy
with my hair
flying everywhere.
Did you know I was gonna have
a little baby? [chuckles]
- Oh, my goodness, no.
- Oh, it's true.
[sighs] I'm gonna name her
Minnie too.
Give Minnie my love.
Did you know
that Anna was pregnant?
Anna?
Yes.
[breathes shakily]
Anna was pregnant.
She was pregnant.
Did he say Byron?
No.
Me?
No. No.
Well, you make sure
we steer clear of that.
Mr. Smith says that
he has a pretty good idea
who killed your sister.
He says that he will tell all
when he has the true facts.
So what, uh--
What's he found out?
I just don't know that part yet.
Nothing.
I'll go see Blackie.
On that, what we talked about...
About it, yeah.
To see what he may say on that.
That's right.
[Blackie grunts]
[Blackie groans]
[Blackie] Ah, yeah. Yeah! Boy,
we gonna be rich tonight, boy!
- [outlaw] Ernest.
- Where's Blackie?
- That's it, huh?
- Yeah.
[Ernest grunts]
[Ernest] Osage graves.
That's disgusting work,
right there.
It's dirty. It's real dirty.
You want something
to pay big, Blackie, hmm?
You can't be working
with them trouble boys.
You gotta use your head.
You gotta think, Blackie.
Hale, he's been--
He's been talking
about us partnering up.
Hmm.
You know Bill Smith? He's--
He's been going around town
talking a lot.
Now, if someone were
to knock off Bill Smith
and-- and Reta too, right?
If she was gone,
all that estate money would go
to my mother-in-law, Lizzie Q.,
and she wills it to my children.
Now, that's a good deal, that.
It's a real good deal.
- For you, it is.
- Mm-mmm.
For all.
Smith and her,
they're gone a lot from home.
All you gotta do is
go down there, and you plant
the stand in the house.
And when they come in...
[clicks tongue] ...you get 'em.
They got-- Reta's got
three or four diamonds.
She got some ear screws.
Bill Smith, he always carries
two or three hundred
in his pocket.
You could have that.
You could have that,
and-- and I know Hale would
pay you a thousand for the job.
That sound like
a good one to you, Blackie?
Hmm.
You know my little
Buick roadster?
You know, the red one
you always got your eye on.
Yeah?
[Ernest] How about I throw in
my Buick roadster?
It's insured more
than it's worth.
Now, I'd get
the insurance money,
and you'd get the Buick.
That-- that's just
a little side deal
between me and you.
Hale doesn't need to know
about that one.
But that's real generous.
Goddamn, you're a greedy Jew, Ernest.
Well, I just love money.
It's true. It's true.
I damn near love it
as much as I love my wife.
[Mollie] Ernest?
Yeah.
Come here.
What is it, huh?
Feeling better
than this morning, huh?
A little.
Yeah. You just--
You just need sleep,
I tell you, hmm?
Sleep.
That's the first thing now.
I don't sleep anymore.
I know. I know. Just-- Just try.
You try to get some rest,
all right?
Come on, now.
I don't even know
if you love me anymore.
Mollie, of course I love you.
I need you here.
I'm right here, Mollie.
I am right here.
I love you.
[speaks Osage]
[chuckles]
[in English]
Oh, you gonna try
to wake the kids up now.
You gonna wake the kids up.
[chuckling][chuckling, shushing]
Yeah. Yeah.[shushes]
[doctor] They're calling it
"insulin." It's from Toronto
and costs dearly.
There ain't
more than five people
that can afford it.
It ain't officially
for sale yet, but Bill Hale
has seen to it for you.
[Ernest]
Did you hear that, sweetheart?
This one.[Martha] This one.
It's from a cow's pancreas.
It'll come down to us
- once a week.
- Mmm.
Look at that.
Wow. A cow's pancreas.
Diabetes can be
- an awful misery.
- Mmm.
Have you eaten
- in the last hour?
- No.
Lift your blouse, please.
There you go.
Have you had
anything to drink?[sighs]
Goat's milk. Hotcakes.
[mutters softly in Osage][speaks Osage, chuckles]
[in English] Well,
she's had, uh-- taffy
and bacon too. Go on. Tell 'em.
[speaks Osage][in English]
You gotta tell 'em.
If you don't stop eating sweets,
this won't matter.
You will lose
your feet, or worse,
if you eat like a white.
Hear that?
[inhales sharply]
It's all right.
Goddamn it.
[vehicle approaches]
[police officer 1]
Hey, Blackie, stop![officer 2] Blackie!
[Blackie] Oh, shit.[officer 2] Stop!
[officer 1] Goddamn it, Blackie!
Stop running!
Where are you
- gonna go to?
- You gotta catch me first!
Ooh, look at that.
[chuckles]
[horn honking]
Hey there.
You brought the Buick out, huh?
Get in. Get in.
[Ernest grunts, clears throat]
[Ernest chuckles]
Byron.
Brother, come here.
- Here?
- Yeah, right there.
Kneel, please, Ernest.
Kneel.
[Ernest grunts]
Did you make a deal
with Blackie Thompson
to steal your red roadster
and cash the insurance?
[clicks tongue] Um...
I, um...
Yes, I did.
Well, Blackie's been arrested
for stealing your car.
What were you supposed to do?
I was-- I was supposed
to feel him out on, uh--
on Bill and Reta.
So who takes care of Bill Smith
and his blanket now?
[stammers] I--Hmm?
I don't know, sir.
Remove the book.
[Ernest] I...
I'm sorry.
All right, Brother. Stand up.
[clears throat]
[Hale] Stand up.
Elbows on the table.
I'm a 32nd degree Mason.
I am imbued
with confidence,
trust and responsibility,
among other things.
Yes, sir.
You know what that is?
No, sir.
[shouts] Shit!
[breathes deeply]
[grunts, shouts]
[grunts, groans]
Damn.
[Ernest sighs]
Now get up! Sit over there.
Are you challenged
to lead your house?
Mm-mmm. No.
She's hired
a private investigator
who noses and brings
unwanted eyes.
She got the tribal council
to pay for Barney McBride's
trip to Washington.
- I know.
- She's a very
hard-headed woman
and she's gonna make it
harder on you!
I'm sorry, King.
You know she's just--
she's just stubborn.
Ernest, handsome son,
what do you think's gonna happen
to Mollie a-and all of them?
I love 'em,
but in the turning
of the earth,
they're gonna go.
Their time is over.
That's it. Gone.
Ernest, there will be
no lightning strike
and it stops happening.
It will happen.
These headrights
must go to Mollie,
not to the mother,
not to the sister, Reta,
not Bill Smith.
Yes, sir.
You've got to take back control
of your home.
Now, you hear me, hmm?
- Yes, King.
- Hmm.
[Burns grunts]
- [blow lands]
- [Burns grunts]
[Hale] World champeen roper
Henry Grammer...
[chuckles] ...finest and biggest
moonshine dealer in the county.
Look at all that blue.
Is that gold, Henry?
Better than gold.
It's recognition.
Now, Henry,
what I need is someone
who can do a job,
someone who can take
a proposition to do
an old man and his blanket.
And I just don't want any man.
I need someone
who can do it right.
'Cause I need them both to go
at the same time.
So it can't be poison whiskey
or something like that.
- It's gotta be foolproof.
- Mmm.
- Hey, John?
- Yeah.
Take this on up the house,
stash it for me.
Don't let Maggie see it.
Oh, now, she got eyes, Henry.
She caught me last time,
and I don't want that woman--
Give it to me.
Why don't y'all just go talk
to Blackie Thompson?
- [chuckles] Well...
- Blackie? Mmm.
Well, he's, uh-- He's in--
in a penitentiary right now.
Tell him why.
Um... [sighs]
Well, I messed up and, uh...
Go on. You tell him.
'Cause he had a harebrained idea
to get him nabbed
on insurance money on his car.
- That's bad luck. [chuckles]
- I'll say.
There's Dick Gregg.
No. Dick's wanted in Arkansas.
Hell, he's wanted in Kansas.
Son of a bitch is so hid,
he can't even find himself.
[chuckles]
You need a yegg man...
somebody,
if youse want explosives,
who'd make damn sure
you get in there
and get them both, same time.
Soup under the house.
Nitro or dynamite.
Blow 'em up.
I think that'd be Acie Kirby.
- Acie?
- [Grammer] Oh, yeah.
- Where's he at?
- I don't really know.
He's pretty squirrelly.
The son of a bitch right there
might though.
- Hey, John?
- Yeah.
Where's Acie Kirby hiding out
these days?
I don't rightly know.
Hiding out in his old hole
somewhere, I suspect.
Why don't you take
your skinny ass
up to the barn,
see if you can find a shovel
and go dig him up?
Mmm. Now?
All right. I'll ask around,
see if I can find him.
Acie Kirby.
Acie. That's your man.
- [Ernest speaking indistinctly]
- [footsteps approaching]
[person speaking indistinctly]
Ready?
Come on.
- Afternoon, ma'am.
- Mrs. Burkhart.
Set up right here. All right.
[Mollie] Tsk, tsk.
What?[speaks Osage]
[speaks Osage][speaks Osage]
[speaks Osage]
[stammers, sighs]
[in English] Fellas, I'm gonna
have to ask you to just
step outside for me a minute...
[stammers]
...while I speak to my wife.
- Outside?
- Of course, Ernest.
Just for a minute.
[door closes]
Well...
What now? What now?[speaks Osage]
[speaks Osage][scoffs, speaks Osage]
[in English] We need
the shots and the insulin.
What then, Mollie? What?[speaks Osage]
[sighs, stammers][speaks Osage]
[sighs]
[in English] All right.
All right, all right.
[door slams]
So, fellas, uh,
just give me that.
I'm gonna go ahead and do it.
You're administering the shot?
Yeah. Yeah.
Ernest,
Bill Hale has entrusted us
with this care.
I know, I know.
It's just the way
it's going right now, all right?
[David Shoun]
We're still gonna have to
charge you for this visit.
We made the trip out here.
Gas, time...
Fuck a duck.
You're gonna charge me
for this robbery? Is that it?
It's only right.
Give me that.
I'll get it back to you.
Go on now. Get outta here.
Go on.
Goddamn it.
There you go.
Made me send the doctors away.
The doctors. [scoffs]
What, am I a doctor?
Are you a doctor?
Stupid, stubborn bitch ought
to let them men do their work.
That's what you should do--[speaks Osage]
[in English]
So I'm the doctor now?
I'm the doctor and the nurse
and the housekeeper, babysitter,
God knows what else all, right?
It's not helping.
It's not any good.
King Hale has gifted this
to you.
He has gifted this. You--
Five people in the whole world
are getting this,
and you're one of them, Mollie.
You're one of the lucky ones.
Think of the children.
That's gonna save your life
right there.
But no, no, you think
you know everything, right?
With your--
With your Indian ways.
You think
you're gonna get better
with all them medicine men
and all them roots and all them
herbs and all the...
[whooping] All that horseshit?
You ain't, Mollie!
That's real medicine!
You think-- [stammers] You think
someone's gonna hurt you?
You think-- You think
I'm gonna hurt you?
You don't say nothing to that?
[speaks Osage]
[in English]
Give it a chance now, all right?
Maybe it's gotta get worse
before it gets better, Mollie.
I am to take care of you.
No one...
No one is gonna hurt you
when I'm in front.
[James Shoun] Open. Ah.[Henry] Ah.
How are you feeling, Henry?
Good.
Well, sometimes I feel sad.
That's not a health issue
for us.
Oh, he's fit as a fiddle.
Come on, Henry,
he's healthy as a horse.
That he is, Bill.
So what are you gonna do?
You gonna kill this Indian?
How'd you know?
[laughs] Better watch out.
[imitates gunshot]
Well, no,
he just needs to be insured,
that's all.
It's just a formality,
but he needs it.
Well, what about my melancholy?
A little whiskey can help that.
You better watch out.
I don't know, Bill.
It may not look very good.
It's hard to justify this one.
He owes me a lot of money.
Bill, my guardian won't give me
what's mine.
What do you need?
I wanna buy some moonshine.
No, no, Henry.
You don't need that stuff.
It's hurting you.
Doctor said I should use it.
I don't care what he says.
He don't know what the hell
he's talking about.
- Come on, Henry.
- Hi, Pearl.
- My wife's on Roy Bunch.
- What?
My wife's on Roy Bunch.
Who cares about Roy Bunch?
You got women
all over you, my friend.
You're lucky with that.
And be at peace
with what you have.
And don't do anything stupid.
I wanna hurt myself.
That's not a man's way out.
A man's to get what's his.
They won't give that to me.
A wife's to give respect.
I don't wanna be here anymore.
I'm ashamed. I'm ashamed
to be an Osage Indian.
Just give me some moonshine
or get me a gun.
Now, Henry-- Now, Henry,
you have a good time with Pearl.
Don't you do anything stupid,
you hear?
I need you, my friend.
I need you.
Henry, no!
What you doing here, Henry?
Henry, no.
[Henry] What do you think
- you're doing?
- Henry, stop it!
Think you can touch
- my wife?
- Get him off me!
You stay off my wife!
I've done nothing to you.[Henry] You're the--
I'm tired of asking
friends for things
when I can pay my own way.
[bank manager] Henry, you've got
to bring your guardian.
Who tells you how to spend
your own money?
Just stop, Henry.
My ancestors had a free life
before you got off
your stinky boats.
[Hale speaks Osage][Henry shouts in Osage]
[in English] You think
you're better than me, huh?
- Think you're better than me?
- [Hale] Come on.
I told you not to do
anything stupid. You went
and hit Roy Bunch. Come on.
I knocked him down,
Reverend Hale.
I knocked him down.
[Ernest grunts]
[breathes heavily]
Why do you take care of him?
'Cause he's a melancholic.
You know he tried
to do away with himself
last year?
Oh, yeah?
I take care of that man
because he's my neighbor
and he's my best friend.
That's $25,000 laying there.
I got an insurance policy
on him.
It's against what he owes me.
So, if he succeeds
in demising himself before
the end of the year, I forfeit.
Hmm.
So, he needs to stay alive
at least a few more months.
I might even get a chance
at his headrights.
Something you should know...
[Ernest] Hmm?
Mollie's first husband
is that man right there
on the floor.
[scoffs]
What do you mean,
"first husband"?
Osage, they don't divorce.
And they were.
They were married in a ceremony
on the reservation.
What do you mean?
You-- She-- You mean,
she's still married to him?
No, no. They were 15.
It's traditional.
Doesn't mean anything--
If I was married,
I'd be telling her that.
She didn't tell me that.
How's she treatin' you?
She treats me just fine.
She's a good one, you know.
Well, you let her have
her secrets.
That way, you have yours.
[speaks Osage]
[wailing, distorted]
[Mollie, Reta wailing in Osage]
[speaks Osage]
[traditional leader
speaks Osage]
[speaks Osage]
[Mollie speaks Osage]
[Mollie, in English]
Is there anyone?
Pitts Beaty's trying
to get his Klan
to find the killers
who killed Anna.
He said they're...
they're helping to take
the lazy men away from town.
Well, Pitts and his Klan are
trying to have authority here,
and they have none.
They need to let the police
do their job.
I'm very disapproving
of the Ku Klux Klan, Mollie.
They're very hungry for a power.
- And they ain't gonna get it.
- Hmm.
Is there anyone?
The tribe tried Barney McBride.
He didn't come back.
We hired a private investigator, but...
[Burns grunts]
You paid him?
- Yes.
- Well, he ran off, didn't he?
Ernest, he ran off.
- Yeah. Yeah.
- Yeah.
Seems that way, King.
Seems that way.
Seems that way.[Hale] Mm-hmm.
I think we should be
a little more considerate
about how we spend
Mollie's money, Ernest.
I don't mean that
as a criticism,
I'm just saying.
You bought a farm.[Ernest] Yeah.
Okay. You didn't consult me.
Maybe you should've consulted me
because I'm there for you, Ernest.
I'm there for both of you.
You met Mollie because of me.
You're here because of me.
Let me help you. Let me give you
my advice, my consultation.
Judson, he didn't tell me
about a hog sickness
that was going on,
but now--
I learned my lesson, King.
Won't happen again.
Just a bad investment,
that's all. Bad investment.
Mollie?
There's something different
about you tonight. What is it?
Uh... Well, now's a good a time
as any, so...
- Mollie, she's pregnant.
- [Myrtle] What?
- [Willie gasps] Oh!
- Oh!
- Yeah.
- [Myrtle] Oh, my goodness!
Oh, my...
Yeah? That so?
[Ernest] Yeah.
- [Willie laughs]
- [Myrtle chuckles]
Oh, my goodness.
Yeah, we got the--
We got the news that
Mollie's having a baby, King.
[Myrtle laughs] Oh, my goodness.
Oh, my goodness.
Blessings.
Blessings upon this house.
- Wonderful. Congratulations.
- Thank you.
[Hale] Bless you.
- Congratulations.
- Thanks.
- [Myrtle] Congratulations.
- [Willie] Congrats.
- [Ernest] Thank you.
- [Myrtle] Congratulations.
[Ernest chuckles]
[Myrtle] We are just thrilled.
[chuckles]
[Mollie] Thank you, Willie.
Henry! Oh, Henry.
Come on in here.
We just got some wonderful news.
Mollie is pregnant again.
[laughs]
[Myrtle] I have a feeling
it's a girl. I am never wrong
about these things.
[Henry] Congratulations.
[Myrtle] I can feel it
in my bones.[speaks Osage]
[Myrtle, in English]
...a baby quilt. We'll pick out
colors. We'll go to...
Congratulations.[speaks Osage]
[Myrtle] We'll go
to the dry goods store...
[in English]
Sorry to bother you.
Uncle, I just need to have
some words with you, please.
Of course, Henry.
You just go sit over there.
I'll be right there.
I just gotta talk to them.
You go.
- Wait for me there.
- Thank you.
You been loving with her
in this sickness?
[mutters] She's my wife, King.
It's, uh... That's what happens. Yeah.
Mmm, maybe it's just
a "preversion" of yours.
Yeah. God bless you
and the child.
[no audible dialogue]
First husband, huh?
You think that means
he's got a claim on the family?
[indistinct]
[Hale] Henry.
[Henry] Uncle.
[Ernest] Ramsey, I know
you're in bad way in this life.
Lots of kids. Seven or eight,
I heard.
Yeah, I got a passel of 'em,
don't I?
King Bill Hale wants to know
if you'd like a job
getting someone done.
Oh, I can't do that.
I didn't sign on
for that kind of work.
Well, it's an Indian.
Now, that's different.
You know Henry Roan?
Nah, I don't know him.
Well, what you think?
Lookee here.
I'm gonna take you right now.
I'm gonna buy you a roadster
so you can drive around
and do this for him.
It's gonna take a lot more
than a roadster to get me
out of the bind I'm in.
Well, we'll work something out.
I hope you don't rumble
over this killing neither.
The Indian, he's--
He's a melancholic.
He's tried
to do away with himself
twice't already.
That's what Hale's been saying.
He even wants you to make it
like Roan did it to himself.
In the front of the head,
you understand?
Front of the head.
[crowd cheering, applauding]
Knights come marching in.
That's it, Pitts.
Hey, Ernest. [chuckles]
[Ramsey] So Ernest had me
meet this Indian over
at a restaurant in Fairfax.
[Ernest] John.
John Ramsey.[Ramsey] John Ramsey.
- Henry. It's a pleasure.
- How you doing?
He sat down beside me,
and I smelled whiskey
on his breath.
...you might be in the market
for a little hooch?
I told him
I could sell him some.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I'm the man
to see for that.
I told him to meet me
out on the road running through
Sol Smith's pasture
about ten o'clock.
Whoo-hoo. Partner.
Look what I done found
in the possum hole.
- [Ramsey laughs]
- [Henry speaks indistinctly]
- Come on. Don't be stingy, now.
[laughs]
- Yeah.
[exhales sharply]
[Ramsey] Mmm. [coughs] Oh.
Boy, that'll make your liver
turn inside out. [laughs]
A few times after I met
this Indian, well, we kind of
got to liking one another,
what with his troubles
being respected and all.
And then sometimes
we'd go to Mrs. Mackie's place.
So he took it.
Can you imagine that?
What kind of sheriff
goes around selling cocaine?
You tell me that.
Don't you tell me that.
[Ramsey]
This went on for a while.
I was trying to rib up
a little more courage,
and one day I decided
to pull the job,
everything being favorable.
So I told this Indian
we get us a jug and some girls
and meet me out on the road
running through Smith's pasture.
Trust me, this is better
than the last stuff we had.
[engine starts]
[people chattering indistinctly]
Goddamn.
- You got a minute?
- Yeah, yeah.
Watch Cowboy for me.
What? What is it?
Where's Hale?
I don't know.
Whizbang, Pawhuska. What?
Tell him it's done.
You did it? You did it where?
Out on the road running through
Sol Smith's pasture.
And that's it.
Take this.
I don't want it no more.
- John.
- I'm done with this outfit.
[Ernest] Henry Roan's dead.
Did he kill himself?
[clicks tongue] Don't know.
He was always sad.
Always.
You knew him well, right?
Since we were children.
Does your uncle know?
They were friends.
Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
He knows.
Was he murdered?
Don't know.
[sniffs] He tried
to kill himself last year.
Did you know that?
[Ernest] Mm-hmm.
Was he murdered
or did he kill himself?
Do you know?
I--
I don't know.
You know, Roy Bunch,
he was making a lot of noise
about killing him.
You know, he's on his wife,
so... [chuckles]
...don't need to look
too far, right?
Maybe he, uh,
just killed himself,
you know, like you said.
It was supposed to be a suicide,
you dumbbell.
You didn't tell him
to leave the gun?
I told him to leave the gun.
I told him exac--
You told him
- to leave the gun?
- Just like you told me, King.
I don't know why he didn't.
I don't know why.
I told him
just like you told me.
You told him to do it
in the front of the head?
Then why'd he do it in the back?
It's so simple.
The front is the front,
the back is the back!
Ma-- He has to make it look
like he done it himself!
It just looks like murder.
It's not supposed to be
that way, you hear?
I told him the front
of the head. Just like this.
Just like you told me.
I promise you. I promise you.
I swear on my children.
Don't do that.
- Calm down. Settle down.
- I swear on my children, King.
And don't swear
on your children.
Makes you look foolish.
[Ernest] I ain't.
I ain't foolish
'cause I've done it right.
What is this, King?
[Hale] 'Fraid lights.
They're putting up lights
to keep the murder away.
[speaking Osage]
[speaks Osage]
Go, go, go.
[in English] There he is.
Pull up the car.
Hey, Roy! Roy!
This is not the place
you should be at right now.
And I have a line
that says you should leave town,
'cause the sheriff's office
is looking to charge you
in this killing.
They know you was
on shooting terms with Henry.
If I run, I'm guilty.
I ain't got nothing
to be guilty about.
[Hale] If you run--[chuckles]
You don't run, you're gonna
go to prison for this,
you done it or not.
Just-- Just my friendly word.
I would run.
Thank you, Bill.
I don't think I will.
And you're not my friend.
Take my chances
right here in Fairfax.
[baby namer speaks Osage]
[speaks Osage]
[Reta, in English] What is
this wasting illness, Mollie?
Wasting? Wasting away?
Minnie died from it.
Momma died from it too.
Anna was shot.
This blanket is
a target on our backs.
Why don't we just leave?
Go to Colorado Springs.
Look at me.
I can't make that trip.
How are you being
taken care of, Mollie?
I have Ernest and my children.
Ernest takes care of me.
[breathes shakily]
The best he can.
- Nettie?
- Yes.
Can you get my sister
some toast, please?
- Of course.
And a bit more coffee too?
- Thank you.
[in Osage]
[Reta, in English] Thank you.
So you and Mollie
staying in town now too, huh?
Yeah, we're here now, so...
Hmm.
You made a nice place
for yourself, Bill.
Real nice.
Thank you, Ernest.
Shoun brothers gave us
a sweet deal
and they left some nice things
here for us too.
Is that right?
Well, not nearly as nice
as what you've been buying
but good enough for us.
Well, you know Mollie.
She likes her nice things, so...
Not as much as you do.
Almost sounded to me like you...
[stammers] ...you was calling me
a squaw man, Bill.
Oh, now, Ernest,
that's something
I'd never call another man.
Right, right.
No offense taken.
You need a drink?
Yeah. I'll take a drink
if you got one.
No.
Then why di'ya ask?
Well, you seem nervous,
that's all.
[grunts] See, the thing is,
Bill, I ain't got no nerves.
None at all.
[chuckles]
It's just that I don't like
talking to you.
That's mostly it.
Well, have I done something
to bother you, Ernest?
Something that's bothering me?
No, no. Just--
Just the way you are
that bothers me.
That's what it is.
Well, Lord made me, Ernest.
Ain't nothing I can do
about that.
No. There ain't.
Unless you aim to kill me.
Or is that
your big brother's job?
[Ernest grunts]
Mollie?
It's time to go, sweetheart.
- Jim?
- Myrtle?
If you have anything special
in the house,
get it out as soon as possible.
Okay.
David?
[horn honks][Ernest shouts]
- [Ernest] You all right?
- Yeah.
I'm off to Fort Worth
for the Stock Show,
but I want you to find
Acie Kirby and tell him
it's time on the Smith job.
- Mmm.
- You hear me?
[stutters]
I just don't know him. I--
I don't know Acie Kirby. Wh--
Where does he find Acie?
Just find John Ramsey.
He'll know.
You got that?
Find John Ramsey. Tell Ramsey
to tell Acie it's time.
We're off to Fort Worth.
Look at me
like this makes sense.
I am. I understand.
I'll find Ramsey
and I'll tell him.
[engine starts][Hale] Okay.
- Uh, John?
- Yeah, that's me.
I got a message for you
from King Hale.
He wants you to find Acie Kirby
and tell him to take care
of Bill and Reta, all right?
- It's time now, John.
- I can't do it right now.
My wife's sick.
Well, my wife's sick too.
My wife's sick too.
Why don't you do it?
Why are you always
trying to get somebody like me
to do your work for you?
Well, 'cause I don't know--
I don't know Acie Kirby.
I don't know
what he looks like even, right?
I would do it,
but I can't do it 'cause I don't
know what he looks like, John.
- All right.
- I'm sorry.
All right. I'll do it,
but I can't do it right now.
You can't get to it right now,
so you know,
this needs to be done
straightaway, not to wait on it,
for Hale.
It has to be done straightaway.
Right now.
You know, you're being
mighty pushy, Ernest.
- I gotta get back to work.
- Let me tell you something.
You got one more chance, John.
This is it. One more chance.
I'ma talk to King Hale.
I'ma tell him
you're gonna do it right now.
I don't wanna lose this job.
[mutters]
John, you ain't got no choice!
It's time.
- Tryin' to be nice to you now.
- I'm gonna do it.
I'm gonna fix it.
I'm tryin' to be nice
to you, John!
- I'm doing it. I said
I'm gonna do it.
- Yeah, you best do it.
Right now, John. Right now.
[knocks]
Acie. Acie.
[Acie] Yeah.
It's John. Don't shoot.
[sighs]
You got your soup with you?
[Cowboy] Momma! Mommy!
[Ernest] Where were you, huh?
I was at Reta's.
Well, you're supposed
to be home.
Come on.
- Cowboy had an earache.
- Oh, boy. Really?
And you know
Bill ain't too kind to Reta
when I'm not there.
Listen, Mollie,
I-- I-- [clears throat]
I don't want you
going out so much right now,
with all that's going on.
[speaks Osage]
- [in English] All right?
- [sighs]
[Mollie gasps, screams]
- Oh, Lord!
- What was that?
What was that?
I don't know! I don't know.
- Vera!
- [Ernest] Oh, Lord.
[Mollie] Vera!
Lizzie!
- [person in distance]
What happened?
- [Mollie] Cowboy to Mommy.
[baby Anna cries][Mollie speaks indistinctly]
[Vera] This is just like Tulsa.
It's just like Tulsa.
[person 2] Careful,
there's glass everywhere!
[person 3] Where the hell
did that come from?
- [Mollie] Whose house is it?
- [baby Anna cries]
[Mollie] Whose house is it?
[bystander]
It's Bill and Reta's!
[bystander 2]
Bill and Reta's house.
Nettie stays in the back room,
that way!
[bystander 3] Nettie's
back there!
[bystander 2] Nettie Berkshire!
She lives here!
[bystander 3] Nettie!
- Nettie!
- That's Bill Smith!
Shoot me! Shoot me!
Shoot me, goddamn it!
[coughs] Shoot me!
[bystander 4] It's Reta!
Reta's over here!
[bystander 5]
It's Reta, come on! It's Reta!
- Can you hear me, Reta?
- [bystander 4] Reta. Reta. Reta.
Reta.
[bystander 5]
I think she's dead.
[bystander 5 sighs]
[baby Anna crying]
Mommy! Mommy! Mommy! Mommy!
Mommy! Mommy! Mommy!
Mommy! Mommy!
[crying continues]
Mommy! Mommy! Mommy!
Ernest?
[screaming, crying]
[announcer]
Welcome to the Fort Worth
Stock Show and Rodeo.
We invite you to head on over
to ring 1 and meet
rodeo champion Henry Grammer.
Get your autographs, be seen,
and talk with the man
up over there in ring 1.
[indistinct]
[townspeople chattering
indistinctly]
Too much dynamite.
- [engine off]
- [hand brake clicks]
You know,
you're pronouncing yourself
too much, Bill.
Nettie, the maid.
They're still finding
pieces of her.
Mollie Burkhart, incompetent.
Allotment number 285.
[photographer] Three, two, one.
[Beaty] You want $300
to go to Washington, D.C.?
[Mollie] Yes.
Well, that's a hard trip
for an ailing woman, Mollie.
And I can't let you have
this money or make this trip.
That would do a disservice
to you and your children.
[in Osage]
[in English]
This may be the last thing I do.
[bell ringing]
[chattering]
It's nice to see you.
Thank you, Chief.
Thank you for your... Chief Bonnicastle.
[reporter, in English]
President Coolidge,
ladies and gentlemen,
please, look this way.
[photographer] Three, two, one.
[camera shutter clicks]
Mr. President, Mollie Burkhart.
Please send help.
There's murder in Osage,
and the police do nothing.
I lost my mother and my sisters.
So many Osage are killed
for the oil money. Please.
Yes.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
[David Shoun] Keep giving
your wife her insulin...
and, uh, add this.
That's this whole vial.
Now, make sure you get
the balance right, Ernest.
[James Shoun]
Now, you keep the shots regular.
It's just to slow her down.
[David Shoun]
That's all it's gonna do.
Slow her down.
[Hale] Mm-hmm.[David Shoun]
That's all it'll do.
[James Shoun]
Same time every day,
30 minutes before a meal.
[David Shoun] The whole vial.
Ernest,
you believe in the Bible?
- Mmm. Yeah.
- Miracles of old?
Mmm.
Expecting a miracle
to make all this go away?
- [sniffs] Mm-mmm.
- You know they don't
happen anymore.
I know.
I know, King. She's, uh--
She's gone to Washington, so...
Just gotta...
s-- slow her down, right?
Yep.
Just gonna slow her down some.
I'm afraid, Sho-meen-kah.
What are you afraid of?
I'm afraid to eat in my house.
Why are you afraid
to eat in your own house?
[in Osage]
[in English]
Do you have any idea
who might want to harm you?
[Mollie] I wanna bring
the upstairs bed down,
into the back room.
We will eat food
only made by Vera,
no one else.
Baby Anna is sick
with whooping cough.
She needs care.
[baby Anna crying]
[Mollie] I want her
to live with Brother
and Sister Bigheart.
This will make her better.
It'll cure her cough.
[baby Anna] Mommy!
Ernest, you pick up my insulin
from the train, you alone.
Do not take it
from the Shoun brothers.
- [crying continues]
- [Ernest] Yes, Mollie.
[thud]
[hoots]
[moans]
My mother came to me.
She asked me to dance with her.
[sighs] I told her
I can't dance anymore.
She told me I was dying.
She didn't want me to die alone.
Well, dreams, they can
make you feel like dying...
[grunts]
...for just a little while,
and then-- then you come back.
Hmm?
She said the man is here.
[Ernest scoffs]
What man?
The man in the hat.
- Hmm.
- I wanna talk
to the man in the hat.
[grunts] Well, there's a lot of
fellas with hats, right?
[speaks Osage]
[Ernest, in English] Shh.
- [speaks Osage]
- [in English] Shh, shh, shh.
[Mollie sighs]
[whispers] You just rest.
[knocking]
[knocking loudly]
Mr. Burkhart?
Who is that?
My name's Tom White. I'm with
the Bureau of Investigation.
How do you do?
Bureau... What? What is that?
[chuckles]
Oh, I was sent down
from Washington, D.C.,
to see about these murders.
Hmm. To see--
see what about 'em?
See who's doing it.
Mmm.
You a detective? Mmm.
- You a Pinkerton?
What are you? [chuckles]
- No, sir, I was a Texas Ranger.
I'm now with
the federal government.
It's called
the Bureau of Investigation.
Um...
I tell you what,
if you got questions--
If you got questions, uh,
y'all go talk to the sheriff.
He can probably tell you
what you need to know.
Oh, yes, sir, I have, uh--
I talked to him.
But I'm here to speak with
Mollie Burkhart whose-- whose
sisters and mother is dead.
Yeah, Mollie?
Yeah, no, she's my--
She's my wife. [chuckles]
[grunts]
She's-- She's sick, real sick
right now. I'm-- I'm her husband
Ernest Burkhart, so...
You can call on her
another time.
But right now,
I don't know what to tell you.
She's not doing too well, so...
How's tomorrow?
Tomorrow? Well, it's-- That--
That's too soon.
It's just...
[inhales deeply] ...like I said,
she's not-- not doing too well.
But you can come back--
Come back on Friday,
how about that?
Well, is she home right now?
Well, she-- she--
[softly] She got the diabetes,
you understand? Yeah.
- Oh, does she?
- Yeah. Yeah.
She's resting right now,
and I'm caring for her, so...
Well, you come back on Friday,
all right?
- Friday?
- Yeah. Friday.
I'll do that. Thank you, sir.
[band performing jazz song]
[speaks Osage]
[in English] This is John Wren.
Friend of Cousin Mary.
He's come looking for family.
[speaks Osage]
[in English]
- Welcome to Osage country.
- Thank you.
[speaks Osage]
[in English] Welcome to Fairfax.
Welcome to Wahzhazhe land.
Yeah, thank you.
I've been told I have
Osage relations in Hominy.
Where are you from?
[music continues]
[Ernest] I gotta talk to you,
King. Gotta talk to you.
Sorry about that.
- Not now.
- No, I can't wait.
I gotta talk to you--You're gonna have to wait.
Can't wait.
They came to my house.
What is the matter
- with you?
- Gotta talk to you.
[Hale] What's the matter?
Ernest.
I'm worried, King.
They came to my house.
They came in the house.
Private investigators.
[whispers, indistinct]
- Your house?
- My house, yeah.
- Who told you that?
- I don't know
what they wanted.
They just-- They--
- They came to my house.
- You-- [stammers] What'd you do?
Look,
I'm getting worried, all right?
They knew something.
[whispers, indistinct]
They're gonna know
- we did something.
- Settle down.
King, we gotta talk
about this right now.
You've got to settle down.
Settle down.
- Do you understand me?
- I do. I do.
- Get hold of yourself.
- I am.
Get hold of yourself
and settle down.
I'm trying.
I am trying, but you--Settle down.
When are we--
When are we gonna talk--Right now. Now. Now!
We'll talk later.
- Not now. Not now.
- All right, all right.
King, wha--Not now.
[music continues]
[Chief Paul Red Eagle]
Are you here
because McBride was killed?
That white man?
Or is it because we had to go
to Washington
and pay United States government
$20,000 to get you here?
[tribe members murmuring
in agreement]
Well, I don't believe
it's too late to find out
who's been doing this.
- Um...
- [Chief Paul Red Eagle] Who?
We have so many deaths,
we've lost count.
[tribe members murmur]
[Chief Paul Red Eagle]
We have hundreds down.
In the old days,
we would fight these people.
Twenty years ago,
when I fought overseas
in the Boxer Rebellion,
I could see my enemy,
and I knew who I had to kill.
[tribe member murmurs]
If we could find these people,
we would kill them.
[tribe members murmuring
in agreement]
No, no, no, no. It's $25,000
come due on Henry Roan.
He's been dead months.
Please, just give me
my Henry Roan money.
You're gonna have
to argue that out with Denver.
They're contesting the claim.
- Who are you?
- I'm J.T. Jones,
from the Denver office.
Well, J.T. Jones,
I want to tell you something.
This is a Fairfax problem.
It's not a Denver problem.
The claim went to Denver.
They are contesting it.
You keep saying Denver.
It's not Denver, it's Fairfax.
Now,
I want my Roan money, please.
Write that note.
Mr. Hale, I'm sorry, but until
I hear from Denver, I can't--
- Do you know who I am?
- Yes, sir.
You're not gonna honor this?
You're not gonna give me
that money?
- No, sir.
- Well, you're gonna regret this.
You're gonna regret this,
Mr. Insurance Man.
- [Jones] Gentlemen, come in.
- [John, indistinct]
[cows mooing]
- [ranch hand] Hey, Mr. Hale?
- Yeah.
CJ Robinson's here to see you.
- Mr. Hale.
- CJ.
Wanna make a price on this?
Well, thought
I'd take a look first.
All right. Make it quick.
Not too long.
[cows mooing]
[crying] She has no face.
They took her head.
We didn't smoke her to the sky.
Wah-kon-tah won't know her.
We smoked the house.
We smoked the house, darling.
You jus-- just don't remember,
that's all.
You don't remember.
We-- We was there
with Bill and-- and Reta
and Joseph and Bertha.
We-- We was all there together.
We was there together for hours.
It's just...
You don't remember, that's all.
Mollie?
[fly buzzes]
You just rest now.
James and David Shoun,
Bureau of Investigation.
We'd like to ask you
a few questions about
the death of Anna Brown.
[David Shoun] Get dressed.
We'll be right back.
[James Shoun grunts]
I think you need to see the, uh,
justice of the peace.
He has the inquest records
about Anna Brown's death.
Those records have gone missing
from his desk.
- So, then you need
the undertaker, Turton.
- Turton.
Yeah, he, uh-- He has
all the details you might need.
Uh... He kept the skull,
- didn't he, David?
- Oh, yes. Yes. [chuckles]
Seen him too,
and that's what brings us
to you.
Possible you lost the bullet
that killed her?
[David Shoun chuckles]
Well, no, because
we never found it.
That's why you were
tearing up the brain,
looking for the bullet?
Yes, that's right.
The condition of the corpse
was so bad because she had been
dead for five or--
- Six. Six days.
- Six days.
And, uh, then we exhumed her.
Why did you cut the body up
into small pieces
and cleave the flesh
from the limbs
with a meat axe?
We were looking for the bullet.
[laughs]
[agent] Uh-huh.
We couldn't find it.
[chuckles] Yeah.
You know, this is a matter
for the Indian tribal council.
You should see Chief...
- Bonnicastle.
Oh, what's he gonna tell me?
This is Indian country.
Go talk to the Indian.
Excuse us, gentlemen.
Well, well, well.
What took you so long
to get here?
Well, I was just assigned
to come down here a week ago.
Oh. Assigned by who?
The president?
No, sir. By J. Edgar Hoover.
Well, I don't know him.
Well, uh, I hear you're
the king of the Osage Hills,
and you might be
the man to talk to.
[Hale] I can give you
my opinion.
Most likely this death business
is at the hands
of a band of men from
outside these parts,
possibly Nigras.
You saw what happened in Tulsa?
Yes, sir.
Then again,
there's just bad luck.
[White] Mmm.
Anna Brown, nasty mouth.
A friend, but a nasty mouth.
Bound to happen.
Henry Roan,
he was a melancholic.
You must know that.
Then, of course,
there was Charlie Whitehorn,
one of the nicest people
you'd ever know.
What about the other dead Osage?
Twenty-five, it's gotta be
- almost 30 now.
- Yeah. Yeah.
It seems more like an epidemic
than bad luck to me.
Yeah, it seems to me
you need to speak
with our justice of the peace.
I did. Uh, I visited with him,
and he was not very helpful.
He wasn't? [grunts]
Principal Chief?
I visited with him too.
They said to... [chuckles]
...come see you.
[chuckles]
Well, we want to put a finish
to this death business,
but this isn't the place
to do it.
I'd be happy to talk to you
and answer any questions,
whenever you have them.
We can meet somewhere else.
But here...? [chuckles]
Not quite the place.
- [White chuckles]
- Hmm.
I guess I-I'll find you
at a later date.
Thank you for your time,
and I'm sorry to disturb
your shave.
Oh, that's all right.
That's all right.
I'll wait to hear from you.
[reel clicking]
[whispering] Hey, Blackie.
Don't turn.
Government men have been
coming around. Stirring.
I've done my time.
[Hale] No use
staying around someplace
when there's trouble.
I owe you for what you've done
for my nephew.
You stood pat
on that roadster debacle.
Just spend time
down someplace else.
Stay out of town.
That place might be Drumright.
- Drumright?
- Drumright.
Try and get there early.
Nigra janitor opens at sunrise.
Appreciate the payday.
[gunshots]
Goddamnit!
[officers shouting
indistinctly][outlaws shouting indistinctly]
- [officer] Hands in the air!
- [officer 2] Don't you move!
[Blackie grunts] Damn it.
[grunting]
Pli and straight.
Thank you, Bill,
for your support
of this town
and all the things you've done
for this community.
And now this beautiful
dance school.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Mr. Bill Hale, our sponsor.
[no audible dialogue]
We brought you an offering
to invite you into our home,
to bless us with medicine.
You made this?
Did your girls get a pony?
Yes, they did.
- Thank you, Bill.
- Course, course.
Uh, Bob, I'd like you
to keep a watchful eye
on your business tonight.
Yeah, I've heard that
they're setting up a robbery
of your store at 11:00 p.m.
So, maybe it's those gems
you stashed.
Two whites and a Nigra.
Thank you, brother.
Course.
Acie, here's the rest I owe you,
with great appreciation.
You aware there's
federal agents around, right?
- Uh-huh.
- They're looking into
that blast.
Well, this ain't federal land.
This is Indian land,
so there's no trouble
that can come.
Good time to take a trip.
I have a nice opportunity
for you if you'll let me
tell you of something.
[Hale] Hmm?
- Sure.
- Okay.
[gunshot]
[robber] C'mon!
[Bob] Stop,
you thieving bastards!
[White] How do you do, sir?
Is this Henry Grammer's setup?
Any idea where
we could find him?
An angel done come down
and wrapped her big old wings
right in his chest.
Now he's down with the snakes.
When this happen?
Yesterday.
[patrons chattering
indistinctly]
Put that away, brother.
- What?
- Come on outside.
Goddamn it. I quit. [coughs]
What is it?
Hey, Byron.
Ernest,
if you're charged,
if anything happens,
you're gonna beat it.
It's okay.
What are you... You're gonna beat it.
What are you talking about?
[stammers, scoffs]
What are they gonna
charge me with?
What could they charge me with?
Ernest, I have many friends.
Many, many friends.
That means I have
the best attorneys.
They protect me,
and they're gonna protect you.
So you don't have to worry.
Nobody's coming after you, Son. Nobody.
Thank you, King.[groans]
- What?
- It's a-- just a...
What? What is it? What?
His stomach's all torn up.
- You all right?
- Yeah... [sighs]
...Myrtie's a mess.
Willie is hysterical.
And I didn't--
I don't know how to-- [stammers]
I don't know
what to do about it, but...
[sighs] But you need--
You need to sign this here now.
Something happens to you,
the headrights got to stay
in the family.
This is the only way to do it.
They got to stay in the family.
You know that.
Well, well--
What if something happens
to me-- What...
[chuckles] If something
happens to me, what?
What-- What would happen to me?
Nothing's gonna happen to you.
It's just-- just a formality.
Nothing's gonna happen to you
because I'm gonna make sure
nothing's gonna happen to you.
You, did you--
Did you sign this paper?
Oh, yeah, he signed it.
Yeah, he signed.
My wife's not sick.
His wife's not sick,
but he signed it.
We all have to sign this.
This way, for sure,
the money stays in the family.
Mmm.
- Hmm.
- Hey, Son...
Hey, Byron, give us a minute.
Sure, King.
[no audible dialogue]
[Hale sighs]
You all right?
Yeah, I'm-- I'm...
I'm-- I'm fine, I guess.
Mmm. You're not afraid?
'Cause there's no reason
to be afraid.
No. I'm not... [stammers]
You giving her the shots?
- Shots? Yeah.
- Mm-hmm.
Yeah, I'm doing wha--
I'm doing what I'm supposed
to be doing.
Giving her all of it?
Yeah. Yeah.
You just gotta remember
to give her all of it.
I am, King. I am.
I'm doing like we said.
I'm keeping her--
I'm keeping her quiet.
She's-- She's quiet.
Well, just make sure
you do it. Hmm.
Now, Ernest,
I know you love Mollie,
and I know I love her too.
But the truth is
she gonna pass on.
You know that.
There's nothing
we can do about that.
It's in God's hands.
And he's waiting on her now.
Now, you-- You got to stay
by her side and give her
this medicine to ease her pain.
And you're never gonna regret
spending this time with her
before she returns
to the eternal.
You're never gonna regret that.
And you're strong now.
Right? You're strong.
Yeah.
Be there for her.
And you need to sign this.
You want me
- to sign that? Hmm.
- You have to sign it, Son.
[clicks tongue] All right, King.
Evening, boys.
John.
This is what I got so far.
I was over in Ralston yesterday.
I met this old-timer
by the name of Alvin Reynolds.
Told me a lot.
[Reynolds] I knew
every Indian they murdered.
That bunch would give
poisoned liquor to dogs
just to see what would happen.
They'd even kill coyotes.
I don't care so much
about coyotes,
but it ain't right
to kill 'em like that when
they could have a natural death.
My son-in-law tells me
I ought to keep quiet
or that bunch
will come after me
and kill me too.
But my time is up already,
so I'm gonna tell you
who did it.
I was sitting right here,
and I saw Byron Burkhart
driving Anna Brown
right down this road.
Kelsie Morrison and his wife
was in the back seat.
They took Anna and got her
good and drunk.
And they were all together.
Kelsie, Byron and Anna.
I ain't lying.
Kelsie Morrison?
[chuckles] Kelsie Morrison runs
dope and whiskey from Fort Worth
to New Orleans to Dallas.
You remember Bill Stepson,
the rodeo roper?
Bill Stepson died
of corn whiskey.
There was no investigation.
Bill's wife was Tillie Stepson.
Kelsie drops his first wife Catherine
and marries Tillie
two weeks after Bill dies.
Two months after that,
Tillie dies from poison.
Kelsie runs off
with Tillie's kids
down to Mexico,
but he comes back
'cause some smart lawyer
tells him
he's gonna be
in much bigger trouble
if he doesn't.
So my dead wife has two kids,
and they have my name.
So, if I adopted them proper,
and if these two kids
were to die,
would I inherit their estates?
They're Osage.
Well, one of them's half Osage,
but they have headrights.
Kelsie, you realize
that this indicates to me
that you're planning on adopting
and killing these children?
No, not if it's not legal
and I don't get the money.
Then I'm not gonna do it.
Kelsie Morrison?
- Who?
- Kelsie Morrison.
My name is Lloyd Miller.
Oh. Oh, come on over here, Lloyd.
We wanna talk to you about that.
I always admired
Kelsie's ambition.
Told him so, and he thanked me.
Kelsie, I have always admired
your ambition.
Thank you.
What can you tell us
about Byron and Ernest Burkhart
and those murders?
Byron and Ernest Burkhart?
I think we can
help each other out here.
[John] I'm in real good
with the people now.
The Wahzhazhe,
they tell me things.
I'm a trusted friend
of Father Albert too.
He confided in me.
Told me everything
that was going on
with Mollie Burkhart.
Said she fears for her life.
[White] He say who
she was most afraid of?
[John] Come on now, Tom.
You got a better chance
of convicting a guy
for kicking a dog
than killing an Indian.
[Mollie sighs]
That's Bill Hale's ranch.
I sold him
a $30,000 fire policy
last month.
Well, Mr. Insurance Man,
looks like you got some work
in the morning.
[groans]
[grunts]
You're next.
[Ernest grunts]
Well...
here we go. [sighs]
Here we go, huh? [sighs] Well...
I got something to tell you.
You, uh...
My wife's-- My wife's real sick.
I got-- I gotta get home
and see my wife.
She's real sick.
S-Son? Come-- Come with me now.
Gotta go talk to my wife.
She's, uh--
She's not doing too well, so...
We're gonna go home, and, uh...
We're gonna go home and--
and take care of her, right?
[White] All right, Son.[agent] Boy.
[Ernest] You got this all wrong.
You got this all wrong.
Whatever you think you know,
you don't know.
Son, you go with him,
all right?[White] All right.
My wife, she's real sick!
Been real sick.
[smacks lips] Can I, uh...
Can I sit down?
Standing's good.
Wanna talk to you about
the murders of Reta and
Bill Smith, and Anna Brown.
[groans]
[fly buzzes]
I need to sit down.
Yes, you do.
But you're standing.
I'm standing now,
but I'm gonna have to get
some sleep.
You can't be holding me
here like this...
[chuckling] ...much longer.
Were you alone
when you put the explosives
under the house
or was Blackie Thompson
with you?
Who?
Blackie Thompson.
No. He was nowhere around me.
Mm-hmm.
I don't even know him so much,
just-- just from around town.
That's all.
And did you put the explosives
under the house?
I don't know nothing
about no explosives.
[fly buzzes]
[White] You didn't
rob a bank in Oilton
with him, did you?
No.
You did, uh,
help Blackie Thompson
steal your own Buick in 1921
for the purposes of
collecting insurance money
on it, didn't you?
Uhm-uhm.
- [White] You didn't?
- Uhm-uhm.
I let him use my bucket
for a while, but that's--
I told him he could
ride around. But, uh...
[White] What did he want it for?
I don't know
what he wanted it fer.
[scoffs] That ain't my business.
Probably to enjoy hisself.
[chuckles]
If a man wanted
to borrow my car, I might
ask him what he wanted it for.
Hmm.
Someti-- Sometimes people
just wanna take a ride.
I don't ask no questions.
So you loaned it to him?
You didn't ask him
what it was for?
[chuckles]
Yeah. [chuckles]
[White] Just a neighborly guy.
[chuckles]
[chuckles] You got me.
[chuckles] I loaned it to him.
[laughs]
I loaned it to him. I guess
that's against the law, right?
[chuckles][White] All right.
How are you doing, Ernest?
Blackie.
[clicks tongue] Um, uh...
May I talk to this man?
May I talk to this man alone
for-- for a while?
They got you turned around?
Me turned around?
No, they ain't got me
turned around, Blackie.
Go on now. [stammers]
What'd you tell 'em?
I told them
when I came out of prison,
to make things right with you,
you gave me $1.50.
You just told us we all knew
the chances we were taking.
Yeah, we did.
We knew the chances
we were taking.
But I didn't give you $1.50,
I gave you a twenty.
No, you didn't. It was $1.50.
I didn't give you $1.50.
I gave you a t--
I meant to give you a tw--
Nah, I did give you a twenty.
No, I remember now.
I gave you a twenty.
- Bullshit.
- Listen.
[clears throat] You gotta just--
You gotta tell me
what you told them, Blackie.
All of it. What you tell them?
- I told them all of it.
- All of it?
I told all of it. I told them
how you and your uncle
are too much goddamn Jew.
Jew?
Yeah, I'm sitting here
doing life for
that Drumright cop.
Well, I'm telling you
right now, Ernest.
You can't handle
any prison, boy.
You're better off
telling them what you know,
for your sake,
for your family's sake,
and for your pleasure.
Y-Y-You know something.
Youse is as dumb as a washboard.
- You know that?
- Oh, am I?
Yeah, you go on yapping
first chance you get,
huh, Blackie?
We-- [whispering]
We were supposed to be partners.
It ain't my fault
that you--Partners?
It ain't my fault you got caught
with the car, you dumbbell.
Call me a goddamn partner?
You didn't give me shit.
Oh, let me tell you something.
Hale's got a whole plan.
And I'm gonna talk to him,
make sure you ain't a part of it
'cause you're so thick
in the head.
He always said
you was thick in the head.
You know that?
This is the plan.
I'm sitting here
because of his plan.
[breathing wheezingly]
[groans]
[Hale] Mollie... [speaks Osage]
[speaks Osage]
[in English] I could be real.
[breathing wheezingly]
All right, all right.
That-- That's enough.
Ernest, you're a good man,
aren't you?
Yes, sir. I am. I suppose so.
You suppose so? [stammers]
Are you or aren't you?
[chuckles]
I am, sir. I am.
You love your wife and children?
Yes, sir. I do.
You served your country
in infantry and--
and I don't think
this is how your life
was meant to turn out.
Now, it seems to me
your family back home,
they're more of a blessing
to you than your uncle,
King Bill Hale.
You and I both know
he presents himself
as a very righteous man.
And that's just not who he is.
He's done nothing for you, son...
except...
make you do bad things
and take advantage of you
because of your... disposition.
So what do you say
we start over?
I, uh...
I wanna get home to see my wife,
so you, uh...
you tell me what I gotta do.
You know who killed Henry Roan?
[children speaking indistinctly]
Don't you run now.
I'm here to take you in.
[White]
I understand you know something
about the Henry Roan murder?
Why, I don't know nothing
about it.
Well, I have a man here
who says he's your friend,
who says you do know something
about it.
Who is he?
So this is on my neck?
[White] Yes, sir.
[sighs]
Get your pencils.
[footsteps approaching]
[in Osage]
[in English]
Does she have a doctor?
No. She won't see one.
Let's take her.
[Mollie groans]
[Mollie, in Osage]
[CJ] Ready?
[Mollie breathing heavily,
groaning]
[John, in English] Ma'am.
[Mollie, in Osage]
We're gonna get you some help.
[Mollie groans]
[Mollie wheezes, groaning]
[doctor speaks indistinctly]
- Mrs. Burkhart. Mrs. Burkhart.
- [Mollie breathing wheezingly]
I need heroin, two milligrams.
You want protection?
- Mm-hmm.
- From who?
From, um... From my uncle.
- Hey, Harve.
- Bill.
I understand I'm wanted. Well,
I'm here to turn myself in.
Wh-- What you supposed
to have done?
Killed somebody,
if you can believe it.
Oh, now, Bill,
I wouldn't go that far.
Arrest me, son.
Uh-- We don't need to do that.
Oh, it's all right.
Come on, son.
- [journalist 1]
Mr. Hale, a statement?
- [journalist 2] Mr. Hale!
What do you know
about the murders?
Just a statement?
Just, "I'm innocent"?
[Hale]
Innocent as a newborn baby.
Even more.
[journalist 3]
Mr. Hale! Mr. Hale!
When am I gonna
get to talk to my wife?
You told me if I testified,
I could see my wife.
Well, she is in the hospital
in Pawhuska right now.
She's in the hospital?
Is she all right?
She doesn't seem it.
You tell her
I wanna get a letter to her.
I got a letter--
[journalist]
Where they taking you,
Mr. Burkhart?
I'm, uh--
I'm going the other way
for a while now.
- [journalists clamoring]
- Where are they taking you, sir?
Where are you taking me?
We're not charging you
with anything because
you're going to testify.
I know you wanna get back
to Mollie and the kids,
but right now it's best
we take you out of state
for a while,
keep Hale and his wolves at bay.
Understand?
[prosecutor]
Just for the record, where
are you currently residing?
Penitentiary.
[prosecutor]
- Serving for how long?
- Got a life sentence.
- For the Drumright job, right?
- Yes, sir.
And that was William Hale
that arranged that, right?
That he did. Yeah, that he did.
Funny, ain't it?
Take a letter.
"Judge not" by William K. Hale.
Who asked you to kill
Bill and Reta Smith?
William Hale
and Ernest Burkhart.
Have you had any recent contact
with Mr. Hale?
Yeah, I have.
Matter of fact, I have.
He got a note to my jail cell.
- Asked me to kill
his nephew, Ernest.
- [expresses shock]
Mr. Thompson.
The vilest criminal
may rightfully demand a chance
to prove his innocence
by a jury of his land.
Judge not.
[Blackie] Yeah,
he got a note to my jail cell
saying he could help me exscape.
And when I got out,
take his nephew Ernest
to old Mexico and kill him.
I sent a note back
saying that I wouldn't testify
if he got me out.
And how did that work out
for you?
How did what work out for me?
Mr. Hale's promise
for a grand escape.
Shit, I'm sitting here
talking to you, ain't I?
Damn, it didn't work out
too well.
Judge not.
Put that in
the Pawhuska Daily Journal,
Fairfax Chief,
The Hominy Journal,
and The Osage County News.
Yes, Mr. Hale.
Your mama's walking.
Doesn't she look wonderful?
Hold steady, son.
Narrow is the way.
[people murmuring,
chattering indistinctly]
I demand to confer privately
with Mr. Burkhart!
This is unheard of.
- Ernest Burkhart is my client!
- [people clamoring]
The rules prohibit this.
I demand the opportunity
to speak with Mr. Burkhart!
This man cannot represent both
the defendant and the witness.
It is a conflict.
He has been missing
for two months!
And I have not had a chance
to communicate with him
before he testifies!
This is tantamount
to witness tampering!
Mr. Burkhart, is this man
really your attorney?
[stammers] I don't know.
[stammers] I don't have
a contract with him, but, uh...
[stammers] I'm willing to sp--
talk to him. Yeah.
- [people clamoring]
- The rules prohibit this,
Your Honor.
The prosecution will not allow
any conference between
Mr. Hamilton and this witness
before the beginning
of these proceedings!
- [crowd clamoring indistinctly]
- The Wahzhazhe people
deserve justice!
Give him to us!
I'll be his executioner!
Mr. Burkhart will be
remanded over to the custody
of the marshals.
Marshals, get him out of here.
Court is adjourned until
ten o'clock tomorrow.
Clear the courtroom.
[clamoring continues]
[insects chirping, buzzing]
[Mollie sighs]
[Ernest] I'm sorry...
for all troubles.
[in Osage]
[speaks Osage]
[in English] Brother.
Brother.
Freeling and Hamilton wanna
see you at Hale's tonight.
Talk things over.
[guests chattering indistinctly]
Sheriff.
[Harve] Ernest.
[Ernest] Aunt Myrtie.
[clears throat]
Ernest, uh, you know
Mr. Solowey? Uh, Solowey Oil?
And, uh, of course,
Mr. Kraceon, Kraceon Oil.
Here. Come sit.
[sighs]
[Hamilton] If you testify
against your uncle,
you realize that
this can be held against you
for the rest of your life
and you can be convicted
for the Smith murder,
spend the rest of your days
in prison? Do you see that?
[stammers] No, I suppose
I didn't think that through
too much. But, uh...
They're giving you
the rope to hang yourself.
Do you see that?
[Freeling] He doesn't see that.
He doesn't see that.
- [Hamilton] Ernest!
- Yeah. Yeah.
If you do this,
you will be murdering
your uncle.
Ernest, you wanna do that,
have him die in prison? [sobs]
Do you, Ernest?
No. Course-- Course
I don't want that, Myrtie.
You know I don't want that.
Yes. You have all the power
to save his life.
He is saving you, dumb boy!
Do you wanna go home right now?
Yes. Yes, I do.
Wanna see
- your wife and kids?
- Yes, sir, I do.
These government men,
they beat you
and they tortured you.
Well, no. No, they didn't.
B-But they-they did
keep me up for days.
- [slams armrest]
- No! They beat you!
They beat you!
Yes, they beat me.
- They beat me, sir.
- Thank you.
[Mollie] I had a dream.
[Ernest] Oh, yeah?
We went to Colorado Springs.
You told me all your secrets,
and I held them
in a box for you.
Then we went to the river
and dumped them all away.
[Mollie chuckles]
We were happy there.
Did I tell you
how beautiful you look now?
Look at you.
[Ernest] Hmm?
You're glowing.
The insulin is working,
ain't it?
I told you. You gotta get worse
before you get better.
What's gonna come now?
All I know, Mollie,
is it's-- [chuckles]
It's real complicated.
White men's laws,
they're ju-- [stammers]
Sometimes you gotta do
one thing,
even though you mean
to do another thing.
And I know that's hard for you
to understand as-- as Osage,
but, uh...
What I have to do is go now
and tell the real truth,
the real truth about
what these government men have
done to make me lie to them.
You kn-- You know
they beat me, right, Mollie?
They beat me. They--
They tortured me.
They kept me up for days
so I would make up these lies
and say that my uncle did
these awful things. It's...
I'm in my right way now.
I'm in my right way, and I'm...
[clears throat]
...not gonna say those lies.
I'm gonna do the right thing,
and I'm-- [stammers]
I'm gonna protect my uncle
'cause he needs protection.
What?
What is it?
When will you come back?
Couple days.
I'm gonna come back
in a couple days.
Now, listen,
they're-- They're gonna
arrest me and all that
just to make a show of it.
But I'm not in
any kind of trouble at all.
None at all.
I haven't done nothing wrong
in this world.
They can arrest me
all they want.
Just make sure
you know the road.
You gonna testify for us?
No, sir, I will not.
You've decided not to testify
for the government?
That's right.
What I told y'all
was a pack of lies.
All right. You turn around.
You're under arrest
for the murder
of Reta and Bill Smith.
[car door closes]
[prosecutor] So how did you
come to kill Anna Brown?
I was hired by W.K. Hale.
[prosecutor]
And what did he say to you?
[Kelsie] I was to get
a thousand dollars,
plus the money I owed him,
which was $600.
So you say
- you killed Anna Brown?
- Yes, sir.
You took her down
into that canyon there
into what was commonly known
as the Three Mile Canyon,
didn't you?
- Yes, sir.
- What'd you shoot her with?
Automatic.
And where'd you shoot her?
Shot her down
through the top of her head.
Guess it killed her.
[prosecutor] Mm-hmm.
Now, you say
you were pretty drunk.
Yes, sir.
But you knew
you were killing her though,
didn't you?
Yes, sir.
And how did you get her
down into that place
where you killed Anna Brown?
Mmm. Byron and I
carried her down there.
And did you make her drunk
so you could kill her?
- Yes, sir.
- Was she laying down
while you killed her?
No, sir.
Well, what position was she in?
Sitting up.
Byron raised her up,
pulled her up,
kind of held her up.
So you stood there
and directed him
how to hold this drunken,
helpless Indian woman
down there at the bottom
of that canyon
while you got ready
to shoot a bullet
into her brain?
- Yes, sir.
- Then what happened
after that?
Turned her loose
so she fell back down.
Did she make an outcry?
No, sir.
And did you stand there
and watch her die?
- No, sir.
- Y-You were satisfied
with your work?
- Yes, sir.
- And you just turned and left?
Yes, sir.
Have you seen that canyon
where you killed Anna Brown?
I've seen it a hundred times,
I suppose.
A hundred times since.
You wanted to go back there and
see where you killed Anna Brown?
No, sir.
No?
Well, what did you wanna
go back there for?
[chuckles]
[chuckling] It's okay.
You can tell the jury.
Well, it's a good-- [laughs]
It's a good place
to park and drink,
put on parties.
It can't be seen
from the road, so...
Where'd you go
after you killed Anna Brown?
Went to sleep at Bill Hale's.
Mm-hmm. What'd you do then?
We stayed drunk.
Where did Byron go?
Back home to Mollie's.
[grunts]
Thanks, Mollie.
You're welcome.
[Ernest grunts]
[Kelsie] Mmm.
Watch your step right there.
[Anna] Watch my step.
If you brought me out here
to kill me,
- I'll kill you.
- [Kelsie] No, come on with that.
Sit down here.
You'll be more comfortable.
[grunts]
Okay, stop. Come on. Get up.
Hold her up there.
Sit her up straight.[Byron] Sit her up straight now.
[Kelsie] There you go.[Byron] Get up.
Set her up straight now.[Byron] Yeah. I got her.
[Anna] You wanna kill me,
I'll kill you.
[Kelsie] There you are.
[Mollie crying]
Ernest.
Wake up, Son.
Yeah. [grunts]
What? What?
What is it?
Well, there's no easy way
around it. Uh...
I'm to tell you
that your child has died.
[stammers]
What-- What child? What child?
I don't know the name.
Who? Is...
Cowboy? [stammers] Which one?
Is there a child
that had some lung trouble?
- Yeah. Yeah.
- Like the whooping cough?
No-- [stammers]
No, who told you this?
Who-- Who told you this?
It was one of our agents
there in Fairfax informed me.
Mollie went to see to it...
and take it home.
There's no--It-- It's Anna.
It's Anna, ain't it?
There's no easy way
around it, Son.
No! Goddamn!
[crying] They took my baby.
[crying]
God bless you, Son. I...
Sorry for your loss.
[Hale] What happened?
The baby died.
- Which one?
- Little baby.
The little one?
Oh, my son. My son...
Oh, my God.
They took...
[Hale] No.
[Ernest crying]
Ernest.
Oh, oh.
Little Anna's
with the Lord now, Son.
Ernest.
Lord, have mercy on us.
Lord, Lord, Lord.
Oh. [sighs]
[Father Albert praying in Latin]
[acolyte prays in Latin]
[Father Albert prays in Latin]
[sniffles]
Hello, King.
How's everyone?
They're-- They're not good.
I know, Son. I feel it too.
[inhales sharply] You--
You know I'm gonna
have to take care
of the two kids and Mollie now.
[Hale] So...
What are you--
What are you saying?
You know what that means, right?
Well... I'm-- I'm gonna testify.
[clears throat]
Well, that's a strong choice
to make against adversity.
Mmm. Well... You sure you wanna do that?
Yeah.
Um, I have to, so...
They gave you a deal?
They gave me a deal.
- Yes, they did.
- Mmm.
They won't hold to it.
Yeah, well,
it's the federal government,
and that's what they told me.
[chuckles]
It's the federal government.
That's why I say that.
Uh, all this is not
gonna mean anything
except the family's
gonna be broke up.
Is that what you want?
It's not gonna
make a difference.
I tell you this
from the deepest part
of my heart.
The deepest thing
that I ever know
in my life, my experience,
is that this will not
make a difference.
[Ernest] Hmm.
You know things
are different now, right?
You know that?
The Osage, they ain't gonna
stand by you. No one's gonna
stand by you no more.
- Osage? They love me.
- No, they're not gonna listen.
No. They-- They know. They know
who gave them the streets,
who gave them the hospitals,
who gave them the schools.
They know.
I've brought them
into the great 20th century.
[Ernest] Mm-hmm.
They're not gonna
stand by you, Bill.
- Oh, yeah. No?
- No.
They're not gonna
stand by you, Bill.
It's over.
I mean, there might be
a public outcry for a while.
But then you know what happens?
People forget.
They don't remember.
They don't care.
They just don't care.
It's just gonna be another
everyday, common tragedy.
Yeah, it's-- It's not common.
Don't do something
you're gonna regret
for the rest of your life.
You're gonna regret... I ain't got
nothing but regret, Bill.
You have a family.
Children. You lost one
already. Don't make it
more of a tragedy--
[Ernest] It's already...
[whispers] ...a goddamn tragedy.
I don't want you near my family.
Not no more.
Well, I'm sorry
- to hear that.
- Yeah.
- It's over now.
- Please, don't
throw it all away.
- No, I can't. I can't.
- I'm sorry to hear that.
- No, I can't.
- I love you, Son.
I can't, Bill. Can't.
[Hale] Don't throw it away, Son.
[prosecutor] Mr. Burkhart,
you're here of your own accord?
Yes, sir.
[prosecutor] No one
has promised you anything?
No. No, sir.
Did you seek out John Ramsey
at your uncle's behest
to kill Henry Roan?
Yes, sir.
Did you drive
from Fairfax to Ripley
to tell John Ramsey
to tell Asa Kirby to do a job?
- Yes, sir.
- And who asked you
to do all this?
[stammers]
My uncle, William Hale.
Can you see him?
Yes, sir.
Would you point to him, please?
Yes, sir. He's right there.
Let the record reflect
the witness has identified
the defendant, William Hale.
And what was the job
that your uncle wanted Asa Kirby
to do?
Uh, to... To blow up, uh,
Reta and Bill Smith.
Why would he want them blown up?
So to get their money.
Are you a married man?
- Yes, sir.
- What's your wife's name?
Mollie Burkhart.
She's Reta's sister?
Yes, sir.
She's also the sister
of Anna Brown, who was murdered?
Yes.
And her mother is Lizzie Q.,
who is dead?
- Yes.
- And her sister Minnie
is also dead?
Yes.
And all these dead women
are Indian women, are they?
Yes, sir.
If Mollie, your wife, died,
who would get her oil money?
[sighs] Me and, uh,
our-- our children.
Did your uncle present you
with a plan
by which you would benefit
from the deaths
of all these Indian women?
Yes, sir.
And you helped your uncle
on your own making?
Yes.
And was part of this plan
that you would meet
and marry Mollie Kyle
and kill her family and her
for their Indian oil money?
No, sir.
I met and married my wife
because I-- I picked her up
in my cab.
You didn't marry her because
your uncle directed you to?
No, sir.
I loved my wife from...
because that's what happened
to us when-- when
I picked her up in my cab.
[footsteps approaching]
H-How's my Cowboy?
Well.
He miss his pops?
Yes.
Elizabeth too.
[breathing heavily]
They, uh-- They know
what's happened?
Not so much.
Have you told all the truths?
Yes, I have.
[inhales sharply]
My soul is clean now, Mollie.
It's, uh-- It's a relief to me
to be out from under all this.
I wasn't gonna let him
get anywhere near you--
near you and the children.
[clears throat]
What did you give me?
What?
What was in the shots?
My medicine you gave me.
What was in it, Sho-mee-kah-see?
[scoffs]
Insulin.
[door closes]
[dramatic orchestral
music playing]
[radio announcer] Right had won.
[music continues]
True Crime Stories
has been brought to you
through the courtesy of
J. Edgar Hoover and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation.
This brings to a close
the authenticated story
of the Osage Indian murders.
As we take our leave
from Osage County, we conclude.
The doctors, the Shoun brothers,
were never pursued
by the legal system
for having certainly helped
poison Mollie.
Ernest's brother,
Byron Burkhart, was tried as
an accomplice to Anna's murder.
Kelsie Morrison said
at his trial...
[imitating Kelsie]
Byron got her drunk...
[gunshot fires]...and I did the rest.
[playing dramatic notes]
Byron was released
after a hung jury.
William Hale, the ringleader
of the deadly plots,
was found guilty and sent
to Leavenworth for life.
- [metallic rattling]
- [creaks]
He would write letters back home
to his Osage friends.
[imitating Hale]
"Dear friends, how are you all?
I never had better friends
in my life than the Osages,
and I was a true friend to them.
I'd rather live at Gray Horse
than any place on earth.
I will be back with you
before many moons.
How is my friend Dah-kah-hee-ke?
Your true friend, W.K. Hale."
Hale was released in 1947.
The parole board cited
his record as a good prisoner
for his early release,
but not everybody was happy.
[imitating Osage chief]
This man, he is being released
because he paid off politicians
and nobody cares
about the Osage lives.
Hale was not supposed
to set foot in Oklahoma again,
but according to relatives,
he often visited them.
What do you want for lunch,
William?
If only that damn thickhead
Ernest had kept
his fool trap shut,
we'd be in clover today.
William Hale died
in an Arizona nursing home.
He lived to 87 years.
[playing dramatic notes]
Ernest Burkhart was sentenced
to life imprisonment
at the Oklahoma
State Penitentiary.
[imitating prisoner] Aren't you
the one who tried to kill
his "Injun" wife
for the oil money?
Years later, he was granted
a pardon for his crimes
and, once again,
moved back to Osage County
where he lived out his days
with Byron in a trailer park
north of the city.
[imitating Ernest]
Pass me a beer, Brother.
[imitating Byron]
Got a light for my Lucky Strike?
[pensive music playing]
[radio announcer]
After Mollie divorced Ernest,
she lived with her new husband,
John Cobb, on the reservation.
She died of diabetes
on June 16th, 1937.
Her obituary in the local paper
said simply...
"Mrs. Mollie Cobb,
50 years of age,
passed away at eleven o'clock
Wednesday night at her home.
She was a full-blood Osage.
She was buried
in the old cemetery
in Gray Horse
beside her father, her mother,
her sisters and her daughter."
There was no mention
of the murders.
[chanting, singing]
[chanting, singing continue]